RelShap: Relationally Consistent Shapley Explanations
Seungeun Lee1, Joao Fonseca1, 2, Julia Stoyanovich1∗
1 New York University, New York, USA
2 INESC-ID, Lisbon, Portugal
Abstract
Machine learning pipelines commonly flatten relational data
into single-table representations, discarding structural con-
straints. Widely used Shapley value-based feature attributions
then rely on feature independence, evaluating the model on
combinations that could never arise in the underlying data,
producing misleading explanations. We propose RelShap,
a framework that incorporates relational constraints and data
provenance into Shapley value computation, restricting both
background data and coalition evaluation to relationally valid
configurations. The framework is estimator-agnostic and com-
poses with Kernel SHAP, Monte Carlo, and Leverage SHAP
without altering their sampling or weighting properties. Func-
tional dependencies further induce equivalence classes over
feature coalitions, which RelShap exploits to reduce runtime
without changing Shapley values; we provide a combinato-
rial characterization of the expected speedup. Experiments
across multiple datasets, models, and estimators show that
RelShap produces explanations that are more faithful to the
data-generating process, correctly identifying the dominant
feature in controlled settings where existing methods, includ-
ing Conditional SHAP and ManifoldShap, do not. Our code
is available at: https://github.com/duneag2/relshap.
1
Introduction
Most machine learning (ML) pipelines flatten relational data
into single-table representations for model training (Fey et al.
2024). Once a predictive model is trained on such a flattened
table, practitioners routinely seek to understand its predic-
tions at the level of individual instances. Shapley value-based
attributions (Shapley et al. 1953; Datta et al. 2016; Lundberg
and Lee 2017) have become a dominant approach for this
purpose, assigning each input feature a score based on its
contribution to the prediction. Notably, relational ML is a
well-established setting (Robinson et al. 2024; Dwivedi et al.
2025), yet approaches that train directly on multi-table data
must ultimately attribute predictions to individual features
and thus face the same explanation-time flattening.
In practice, this computation requires two conceptual
choices: background data selection, which determines how
feature absence is simulated using reference data, and coali-
tion selection, which specifies which feature subsets are eval-
uated. Existing methods instantiate different sides of the
∗Corresponding author.
tension between being true to the model and true to the
data (Chen et al. 2020; Frye et al. 2021; Janzing et al. 2020).
SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017), the most widely used im-
plementation, stays true to the model by assuming feature
independence but potentially considers feature combinations
that never arise in the data. Aas et al. (2021) instead remain
true to the data by estimating conditional distribution, but
only as true as the estimate itself, and the estimator’s errors
propagate directly into the attributions.
Both premises are problematic on data drawn from a re-
lational database. The flattening step can discard database-
level information, such as functional dependencies (FDs)
that imply that some features are fully determined by others,
and domain constraints that restrict admissible values. Fea-
ture independence is violated by these very constraints, and
conditional distribution estimation, while potentially avoid-
ing that violation, introduces its own modeling assumptions.
When attribution methods ignore relational constraints, they
may evaluate the model on inputs that could never arise from
the underlying relational data, thereby fundamentally alter-
ing the resulting feature attributions.
Core contribution:
We present RelShap—Relationally
Consistent Shapley Explanations—the first framework to in-
tegrate relational database constraints into Shapley value-
based feature attributions. RelShap changes the admissible
space of the Shapley explanation itself: instead of relying
on feature independence assumptions or additional distri-
butional modeling, it restricts both background data and
coalitions to relationally valid configurations through con-
straints derived from the database schema, query, and data.
Importantly, in controlled settings with known ground truth,
RelShap correctly identifies the dominant feature where
Kernel SHAP, Conditional SHAP, and ManifoldShap do not
(Section 4.1). For instance, in a loan approval scenario (Ex-
ample 1), the explanation changes substantially depending on
whether relational constraints are respected (Figure 1). The
divergence is not a sampling artifact but a consequence of
which feature combinations the explanation method permits.
Example 1. Consider two tables, Applicants(a_id,
age, life_stage, empl) and Transactions(t_id,
a_id, amount), linked by applicant identifier a_id. Six
representative applicants and their transactions are shown
in Tables 1a and 1b. A data analyst issues the query:
arXiv:2608.11508v1  [cs.LG]  11 Aug 2026


SELECT a.a_id, a.age, a.life_stage, a.empl,
SUM(t.amount) AS total_amt
FROM
Applicants a, Transactions t
WHERE
a.a_id = t.a_id
GROUP BY a.a_id, a.age, a.life_stage, a.empl;
to obtain an applicant-level view, then drops the identifier
a_id and adds a target loan_approved to yield the ML-
ready dataset in Table 1c.
ML practitioners computing explanations typically receive
only this final flattened representation, with no visibility into
the upstream structure. Applicant a27 applied for a loan, was
rejected, and sought an explanation. Kernel SHAP (Lundberg
and Lee 2017), a widely used method, reports life_stage
as the top driver of the prediction with a positive score (Fig-
ure 1a). This attribution, however, is an artifact of relationally
invalid completions from Kernel SHAP. For instance, fixing
age = 35 and filling in the rest from applicant a29 yields
the combination (age = 35, life_stage = older),
which is impossible under the FD age →life_stage
(first row of Table 1d).
RelShap instead operates over a space of relationally
valid completions, automatically extracting constraints from
the data’s relational structure. In this example, the data re-
veals a functional dependency (FD) age →life_stage:
each age value maps to exactly one life stage. Similarly,
because the query aggregates all of an applicant’s transac-
tions into a single row, each applicant identifier determines
exactly one total_amt. RelShap enforces these con-
straints during Shapley computation: fixing age = 35 forces
life_stage = middle (second row of Table 1d); the re-
maining attributes are unconstrained and filled from a chosen
background data point (a29). Additionally, RelShap sup-
ports a provenance-aware mode that traces each row of the
flattened table back to its source tuples in the original tables.
Fixing age = 35 narrows the provenance to a27, the sole
applicant with that age, at which point the schema determines
empl = self_emp and total_amt = 119 (third row of
Table 1d). Provenance-based recovery is not always avail-
able when it does not resolve to a single tuple: age = 63,
for instance, is shared by a12 and a29. See Appendix A
for a primer on relational concepts and a detailed descrip-
tion of how RelShap extracts constraints from the database
schema, query structure, and data.
Notably, RelShap computes different Shapley values
even without approximation. Under both RelShap vari-
ants, life_stage receives exactly zero attribution (which
does not necessarily generalize), down from +0.2299 un-
der Kernel SHAP (Figure 1), because the discovered FD
age →life_stage makes life_stage redundant
when age is present in a coalition, once coalitions are pro-
jected to relationally valid completions (Section 3). Kernel
SHAP ignores this redundancy and distributes substantial
attribution to life_stage. The top-ranked feature con-
sequently changes from life_stage to age. In all three
cases, feature attribution values are computed exactly, over
all background points and all coalitions; the divergence is
not a sampling artifact but a consequence of which feature
combinations the explanation method permits.
Our contributions are as follows:
Table 1: Running example (excerpt)
(a) Applicants (excerpt)
a_id age life_stage
empl
a12 63
older
unemp
a14 26
young
unemp
a24 54
middle
emp
a25 22
young
self_emp
a27 35
middle self_emp
a29 63
older
unemp
(b) Transactions (excerpt)
t_id
a_id
amount
t62
a25
47
t67
a27
43
t68
a27
59
t69
a27
17
t73
a29
50
...
(c) Flattened, ML-ready dataset (excerpt): a27 is highlighted.
age
life_stage
empl
total_amt
loan_approved
63
older
unemp
264
1
26
young
unemp
94
0
54
middle
emp
235
1
22
young
self_emp
100
0
35
middle
self_emp
119
0
63
older
unemp
114
0
(d) Completions for age = 35 under increasing relational aware-
ness. The first row violates the FD age →life_stage.
age life_stage
empl
total_amt
Kernel SHAP (unaware)
35
older
unemp
114
RelShap (FDs only)
35
middle
unemp
114
RelShap (FDs + provenance) 35
middle
self_emp
119
1. RelShap alters both background data and coalition se-
lection under relational constraints, producing attribu-
tions that correctly reflect the data-generating structure
(Section 4.1).
2. RelShap is agnostic to the choice of background data
and coalition estimator: it enforces relational validity as
a plug-in restriction layer while preserving the chosen
background modeling approach and the base estimator’s
sampling and weighting scheme.
3. Computational effects: RelShap achieves orthogonal
acceleration by avoiding redundant coalition evaluations
while preserving Shapley values (Prop. 1). We combina-
torially characterize the resulting speedup factor as a func-
tion of the coalition estimator and FD structure (Thm. 1).
4. We evaluate RelShap on 9 datasets across 4 models
and 3 coalition estimators, empirically validating both the
semantic effects and the runtime predictions of Thm. 1.
2
Preliminaries & Related Work
Let F be the set of input features, f : R|F | →R a predictive
model trained on Dtrain, and x ∈Dtest an instance to be
explained. To explain the prediction f(x), for any coalition
S ⊆F, xS denotes the projection of x onto S. The Shapley
value of feature i ∈F is defined as
ϕi(f) =
X
S⊆F \{i}
|S|!(|F | −|S| −1)!
|F |!
 f(xS∪{i}) −f(xS)

.
(1)
As discussed in Section 1, computing Eq. (1) in practice re-
quires two design choices: background data selection, which


0.4
0.2
0.0
      35 = age
     119 = total_amt
self_emp = empl
  middle = life_stage
 age
 total_amt
 empl
 life_stage
+0.2299
+0.1788
+0.0073
0.1549
[f(X)]=
0.2276
f(x)= 0.0335
(a) Kernel SHAP.
0.4
0.2
0.0
  middle = life_stage
     119 = total_amt
self_emp = empl
      35 = age
 life_stage
 total_amt
 empl
 age
+0.2102
+0.2058
+0
0.1549
[f(X)]=
0.2276
f(x)= 0.0335
(b) RelShap (FDs only).
0.2
0.0
  middle = life_stage
     119 = total_amt
self_emp = empl
      35 = age
 life_stage
 total_amt
 empl
 age
+0.163
+0.109
+0
0.011
[f(X)]=
0.2276
f(x)= 0.0335
(c) RelShap (FDs and provenance).
Figure 1: Kernel SHAP vs. RelShap feature attributions for applicant a27 in Example 1 under an XGBoost classifier.
determines how features in F \ S are filled in when evalu-
ating f, and coalition selection, which subsets S ⊆F \ {i}
are evaluated. Since exhaustive enumeration over reference
points and over the 2|F |−1 coalitions is infeasible in practice,
both are typically operationalized via sampling. The two di-
mensions admit a multiplicity of instantiations (Sundarara-
jan et al. 2020) and are typically treated as orthogonal (Zern
et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2020). RelShap operates at the level
of selection rather than sampling: it restricts the admissible
background and coalition spaces to relationally valid config-
urations, so it applies whether the values are then computed
exactly or approximated by any estimators. Appendices B.1
and C provide additional details.
2.1
Background Data Selection
Let Pbg(zF \S) denote a background distribution over the
absent features indexed by F \ S, and B be the number
of background samples (possibly all reference data points).
With a completed input ˜x(S, zF \S) ∈R|F |, we define
f(xS) = EzF \S∼Pbg
h
f
 ˜x(S, zF \S)
i
.
Methods differ in their choice of Pbg. Interventional meth-
ods (Janzing et al. 2020; Zern et al. 2023), including default
Kernel SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017), treat feature absence
as an intervention and fill absent features from the empiri-
cal marginal distribution, which is assumption-light but can
break feature dependencies. Conditional SHAP (Aas et al.
2021) instead estimates the distribution of absent features
given the observed ones, aiming to preserve dependencies
but potentially introducing estimator error. Causal meth-
ods (Heskes et al. 2020) intervene through a causal graph
among the features, and ManifoldShap (Taufiq et al. 2023)
restricts completions to an estimated data manifold. These
methods span the true to the model vs. true to the data axis
discussed in Section 1 (see Appendices B.2, B.3 for details).
Importantly, RelShap is orthogonal to this axis: rather
than choosing what distribution to put on the absent features,
it constrains which configurations the chosen distribution is
allowed to place mass on under relational constraints. The
two design dimensions therefore compose rather than con-
flict: RelShap can be layered on top of any background
data selection method. By default we use marginal (feature
independence) as the base when no relational constraints
are available (Def. 1), to comply with the no-distributional-
assumptions property (Sundararajan et al. 2020; Janzing et al.
2020) while removing the structurally infeasible inputs that
Frye et al. (2021) and Taufiq et al. (2023) warn about.
2.2
Coalition Selection
We draw M coalitions from a coalition distribution Pcoal
over S ⊆F \ {i} and approximate
ϕi(f) ≈1
M
M
X
m=1
w
 S(m)
f(xS(m)∪{i}) −f(xS(m))

.
Different Shapley value estimators choose different Pcoal
and importance weight w. Kernel SHAP (Lundberg and Lee
2017) fits a weighted linear surrogate using the Shapley
kernel, which concentrates weight on extreme (very small
or large) coalition sizes. Monte Carlo (MC) estimator sam-
ples coalitions from the Shapley-weighted distribution, with
coalition sizes sampled approximately uniformly. Leverage
SHAP (Musco and Witter 2025) uses leverage score-based
sampling, sampling the coalition size nearly uniformly and
then sampling a coalition uniformly within that size. Recent
variants further improve estimation through residual estima-
tion (Witter et al. 2025) or Fourier basis reduction (Fumagalli
et al. 2026a).
RelShap is estimator-agnostic and provides orthogonal
acceleration: it preserves any base estimator’s sampling dis-
tribution, weights, and accuracy guarantees, canonicalizing
sampled coalitions under relational validity (Def. 2). Wit-
ter et al. (2026) also uses equivalence classes, but derives
them from structural causal models (see Appendix H.1 for
a detailed comparison). Maafa et al. (2018) studies lattice-
structured coalition spaces to reduce computations, but not
for ML predictions.
2.3
Relational Structure in ML Data
Many ML datasets originate from relational databases, where
data is organized into multiple tables linked by keys. Flat-
tening this structure into a single table for model training
discards integrity constraints that govern valid data combi-
nations. A functional dependency (FD) A →B states that
the value of attributes in A uniquely determines the value
of B; for instance, in Example 1, age →life_stage
means each age value maps to exactly one life stage. Domain
constraints restrict attributes to valid ranges conditioned
on other attributes (e.g., if region = ‘North America’


then currency ∈{‘USD’, ‘CAD’, ‘MXN’}). Denial con-
straints capture structural prohibitions such as mutual ex-
clusivity in one-hot encoded features. Standard Shapley es-
timators are free to violate all of these, evaluating the model
on feature combinations that could never arise in the data-
generating process. RelShap systematically prevents this.
A fuller introduction to relational concepts is in Appendix A.
3
The RelShap Framework
3.1
Relational Constraints
RelShap first prepares relational constraints for down-
stream modules, either directly from relational inputs or from
flattened-only inputs through normalization (Figure 2). We
denote a relational schema as S, a query as Q, and the result-
ing flattened dataset as D. The schema, query, and resulting
data together induce a collection of relational constraints,
which we denote by Σ{S,Q,D} = ΣFD∪Σdom∪Σden, where
ΣFD, Σdom, and Σden are the sets of FDs, domain constraints,
and denial constraints, respectively. After extracting all re-
lational constraints, users inspect them and specify which
types of constraints to include and to what extent; we denote
the resulting set by Σ. Details are in Appendix D.1.
Relational schema. ΣS contains schema-declared in-
tegrity constraints: FDs from primary and unique keys, de-
pendencies induced by foreign keys (applied when the corre-
sponding relations are joined in the query), and conditional
domain constraints (e.g., CHECK clauses), ignoring unary
type constraints already satisfied by the data.
Query. We parse Q using SQLGlot (GitHub 2023) to ex-
tract query-induced FDs and conditional domain rules. ΣQ
FD
identifies GROUP BY clauses, window aggregation, top-1
selection patterns, and self-joins. ΣQ
dom captures WHERE and
JOIN predicates.
Flattened data. RelShap discovers exact minimal FDs
with bounded left-hand-side size (default 2) and single-
attribute right-hand sides; multi-attribute right-hand sides
can be derived via Armstrong’s axioms (Armstrong 1974).
For any L ⊆F and attribute a /∈L, let D/L denote the parti-
tion of D induced by equality on L; an FD L →a holds if, for
all equivalence classes C ∈D/L, |DISTINCTa(C)| ≤1.
For each discovered FD A →B with |dom(B)| ≤20 (de-
fault), we derive conditional domain rules (B = s) ⇒φ(A):
for categorical A, φ(A) is the set of observed values; for con-
tinuous A, an interval [ℓs, us] estimated from the data. We
also extract denial constraints by identifying cycles in the FD
set (e.g., A →B, B →C, C →A) and testing for structural
patterns common in ML data, such as scaled one-hot encod-
ings and exclusive-or among binary attributes. By default,
we use D for constraint discovery and Dtrain as the reference
distribution (see Appendix D.2).
3.2
Background and Coalition Selection
RelShap incorporates two types of relational constraints:
global, applied to all test instances, and local, instantiated per
test instance. ΣFD is global; provenance-aware constraints,
Σdom, and Σden are applied locally.
Flattened
tabular data
Query
RDB
Resulting table
Constraint
Extraction
Quotient mode
1
Step 1, 2, 3: change 
explanations 
(relational validity)
Relational Constraints Preparation
Step 4: saves 
time only 
(Shapley values 
unchanged)
Relational
Input
OR
Normalization
4
2
Provenance-aware mode
3
Integrity constraints mode
Relational 
background mode
RelShap Core
Figure 2: RelShap workflow. The upper panel extracts re-
lational constraints; the core applies relational background
(ΣFD), provenance-aware, and integrity constraints modes,
which change explanations, and quotient mode, which re-
duces runtime while leaving Shapley values unchanged.
Definition 1 (Relationally Consistent Background Distribu-
tion). Given a feature set F, a coalition S ⊆F, an instance
x, and a set of relational constraints Σ, we define
PRel
bg =
(
PMarginal
bg
,
if Σ = ∅,
bP
 ZF \S
 ˜x(S, ZF \S) |= Σ

otherwise.
Under Def. 1, any coalitions S and S′ are Σ-equivalent,
i.e., S ∼Σ S′, if they induce the same set of relationally
valid completions under Σ. Accordingly, [S]Σ denotes the
equivalence class of S under ∼Σ, and the Σ-coalition space
CΣ is the quotient of the original coalition space by ∼Σ,
collapsing coalitions indistinguishable under Σ.
Definition 2 (Quotient space coalition projection). Given
CΣ, quotient space coalition projection is a post-sampling
procedure that maps a coalition S ⊆F \ {i} drawn by any
sampler to its Σ-equivalence class [S]Σ (i.e., each coalition
value is replaced by its canonical representative under Σ).
For example, if Σ contains an FD a →b over {a, b, c},
then {a} ∼Σ {a, b} and {a, c} ∼Σ {a, b, c}, and hence each
pair belongs to the same Σ-equivalence class. Under Def. 2,
once a coalition is evaluated, subsequent samples mapping
to the same Σ-equivalence class reuse cached results with-
out additional model calls. Two properties hold, for distinct
reasons. First, quotient space coalition projection (quotient
mode) leaves Shapley values unchanged (Prop. 1) because it
only reuses cached evaluations of equivalent coalitions. Sec-
ond, the base estimator’s coalition distribution, weighting
scheme, and accuracy guarantees are preserved because all
constraints (FDs, provenance, integrity constraints) are ap-
plied to each sampled coalition before quotient deduplication


Algorithm 1: RelShap
1: Input: Pcoal, Σ, x (instance), M (coalition budget)
2: Output: canonical coalitions M
3: Seen ←∅,
M ←[ ]
4: for t = 1 to M do
5:
sample a raw coalition m ∼Pcoal
6:
if relational background mode under ΣFD then
7:
m ←CanonicalizeCoal(m)
8:
end if
9:
if provenance-aware mode then
10:
m ←m ∪ProvExpand(m, x, ΣFD)
11:
end if
12:
if integrity constraints mode then
13:
m ←m ∪ICRepair(m, x, Σdom ∪Σden)
14:
end if
15:
if quotient mode and m ∈Seen then
16:
continue
▷reuse cached evaluation
17:
end if
18:
Seen ←Seen ∪{m}; M ←M ∪{m}
19: end for
20: return M
(Algorithm 1). Together these provide orthogonal accelera-
tion under Σ̸ = ∅. See Appendix H.1 for details and proof.
Proposition 1 (Shapley value invariance under quotient
space coalition projection). Quotient space coalition projec-
tion does not change the resulting Shapley value of feature
i, i.e., using only relational background distribution with or
without quotient space coalition projection yields identical
Shapley values, and this holds for all coalition estimators.
Moreover, whenever ∼Σ is non-trivial, quotient projec-
tion strictly reduces the coalition space, |CΣ| < 2|F |−1 (see
Appendix F.2); Section 3.3 quantifies the expected reduction.
Provenance-aware mode
Provenance-aware mode incor-
porates local constraints: identifier-induced FDs (primary
and foreign keys; they are part of global ΣFD but applied
instance by instance) no longer explicit in the flattened table
(e.g., when identifiers are dropped as in Example 1). Given
a coalition, we check whether an identifier can be inferred
from the observed features. In strict mode, dependencies
are applied only when the identifier is uniquely determined;
in relaxed mode, dependencies are applied to any attribute
whose value is constant across the narrowed candidate set.
For instance, in Example 1, observing only the age of a29
yields candidates {a12, a29}; although the exact identifier
is ambiguous, life_stage (which may already be de-
termined by age) and empl take the same value for both
and can still be used. Provenance-aware mode is applicable
even when no other relational structure exists within the fea-
ture tables (e.g., discovered FDs), and when identifiers have
been dropped during flattening. Standard (non-provenance)
RelShap is typically sufficient in with-key settings where
identifiers are retained (e.g., recommender systems).
3.3
Algorithm and Runtime Analysis
Algorithm 1 orchestrates RelShap: it draws M raw coali-
tions from a base coalition distribution, maps each to its
canonical representative, expands it with local provenance
information when available, applies integrity constraints,
and deduplicates coalitions. CanonicalizeCoal lets Σ-
equivalent coalitions share one evaluation based on FDClo-
sure; ProvExpand incorporates identifier-induced depen-
dencies using prebuilt inverted and row-set indexes, requir-
ing only identifier-level lookups independent of dataset size,
rather than full group-by operations; and ICRepair extends
the coalition with features whose values are forced by domain
and denial constraints (all subroutines are in Appendix G).
RelShap first samples coalitions from the base coalition
distribution and then applies all available relational con-
straints, reusing cached evaluations when possible and evalu-
ating new coalitions otherwise. This procedure preserves the
base sampler’s draws while enforcing relational consistency
and avoiding redundant evaluations (|M| ≤M).
Runtime analysis.
The runtime reduction from quotient
space coalition projection is the decrease from the sampling
budget M to the number of distinct projected coalitions |M|.
Prior works (Demetrovics et al. 1985, 1992) characterize |CΣ|
for representative FD structures (Appendix H.2), but only un-
der deterministic coalition evaluation. RelShap also sup-
ports stochastic sampling from Pcoal, where widely used
estimators sample with coalition size-dependent probabili-
ties pk = Pr(|S| = k) (Section 2.2). We therefore decom-
pose the probability of reaching each class by coalition size
and derive the expected reduction combinatorially: speedup
arises when the sampler repeatedly hits the same equivalence
class, allowing evaluations to be reused.
Theorem 1 (Expected reduction under quotient mode). Let
q(C) = PrS∼Pcoal([S]Σ = C) be the probability that a
sampled coalition maps to Σ-equivalence class C ∈CΣ. If
the draws are i.i.d., the expected number of distinct classes
evaluated after projection mode is
E[KM] =
X
C∈CΣ
 1 −(1 −q(C))M
,
where q(C) = P|F |−1
k=r(C) pk
NC(k)
(
|F |−1
k ) is the probability of a
sampled coalition landing in class C. Hence the normal-
ized expected runtime speedup factor relative to the baseline
sampler is RM = 1 −E[KM]/M.
NC(k) is the number of size-k coalitions whose projec-
tion belongs to C, and r(C) = min{|S| | [S]Σ = C} is the
minimum size of any coalition generating C (rank). For the
FD a →b over {a, b, c} from Section 3.2, quotient mode
reduces |CΣ| from 23 = 8 to 6. Intuitively, FDs with small
left-hand sides (LHSs) induce classes with small r(C), so
many coalitions collapse to the same class, yielding large
NC(k) at small sizes. The improvement for Kernel SHAP is
therefore amplified when Σ contains many low-arity depen-
dencies, since it concentrates mass on extreme coalition sizes
and FDs with small LHSs are common in practice; Monte
Carlo and Leverage SHAP spread mass more evenly across k,
so their improvement tracks the overall magnitude of NC(k).
We ignore implementation-level costs (e.g., lookup or index-
ing) and assume i.i.d. draws; sequential samplers may intro-
duce mild dependence in practice. Appendix H.3 provides a
proof and Section 4 confirms that observed speedups closely
match this analysis.


4
Experimental Evaluation
We evaluate RelShap on 9 datasets: 5 standard ML
datasets normalized into relational form (Papenbrock et al.
2017) — Amazon Employee Access (OpenML 2022),
Churn (OpenML 2017), Churn Modelling (Kaggle 2020),
German Credit (OpenML 2014), and SpeedDating (OpenML
2016) — and 4 relational datasets: TPC-H (TPC 2014), UW-
CSE (Motl et al. 2015; CTU 2003), MovieLens 20M (Kaggle
2016), and a Synthetic dataset extending Example 1 with do-
main and denial constraints.
We train logistic regression, XGBoost (Chen et al. 2016),
Random Forest (Liaw et al. 2002), and MLP-PLR (Gorish-
niy et al. 2022), covering linear, tree-based, and neural mod-
els, and compute explanations with Kernel SHAP, MC, and
Leverage SHAP (means and standard deviations over three
seeds) for nexplain = min(200, |Dtest|) instances per dataset,
using a per-dataset convergence budget Mconv at which Shap-
ley estimates stabilize (Covert et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2022).
Relational constraint extraction is a one-time preprocess-
ing step reused across all explanations; it completes within
12 seconds on every dataset except SpeedDating (482.7s)
and MovieLens 20M (98.9s), where data-driven FD discov-
ery dominates, and its cost, typically offset by the resulting
speedups, is excluded from runtime comparisons. Setup de-
tails are in Appendices I and J.1.
In summary,
our experiments show that standard estima-
tors query impossible worlds constantly; when ground truth
is known, RelShap is the only method that recovers the
correct explanation; on real data, the correction is large and
systematic; and it comes at reduced, not increased, runtime.
4.1
Validation with Ground Truth
We demonstrate that RelShap yields more intuitive expla-
nations than existing methods in a controlled setting, fol-
lowing experiments in Taufiq et al. (2023). Building on Ex-
ample 1, we consider a loan approval scenario restricted
to two features (age and life_stage), with an FD
age →life_stage. We define a synthetic predictor
g(x) = 1{age > 50} + δ r(life_stage) 1{x̸ |= Σ},
where r(life_stage) ∈{0.3, 0.6, 0.9} assigns an arbi-
trary constant to each of the three life stages, and δ ranges
from 0 to 10 in increments of 0.5. Since every data instance
satisfies Σ, the second perturbation term is inactive during
training and testing and is triggered only by relationally in-
valid combinations generated during Shapley computation.
Thus, predictions on the valid domain depend only on age,
and a semantically intuitive explanation should assign greater
importance to age than to life_stage regardless of δ.
Figure 3 shows how often each feature receives the larger
absolute attribution as δ increases. All three baselines rank
age first more often than life_stage; however, Kernel
SHAP increasingly shifts attribution toward life_stage
as invalid perturbations grow. Conditional SHAP and Man-
ifoldShap are less sensitive to increasing δ, but still rank
life_stage first for a substantial fraction of instances.
In contrast, RelShap consistently assigns the larger attri-
bution to age for all δ. This indicates that the explanation
change from RelShap is not a mere difference; it is an
0.0
0.5
1.0
Kernel SHAP
Conditional SHAP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
δ
0.0
0.5
1.0
ManifoldShap
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
δ
RelShap (FD: age 
 life_stage)
age
life_stage
Top attribution frequency
Figure 3: Comparison of top attribution frequency across
methods as δ varies; exact Shapley values computed via full
coalition enumeration.
improvement with respect to relational validity, achieved by
eliminating impossible worlds.
The mechanism behind these differences is instructive.
We measure violation prevalence: the fraction of coalitions
violating at least one relational constraint. Kernel SHAP
fills life_stage from the marginal distribution, indepen-
dently of age, so 31.8% of its coalitions violate the FD (e.g.,
age = 35 with life_stage = older); each violation
activates the perturbation term δ r(life_stage), and the
resulting spurious attribution to life_stage grows with δ.
Conditional SHAP, which estimates the conditional distribu-
tion of life_stage given age, and ManifoldShap, which
restricts completions to an estimated data manifold, suppress
most, but not all, violations (4.8% and 5.1%, respectively),
explaining their partial yet incomplete robustness. RelShap
enforces the FD exactly: its violation prevalence is 0%, the
perturbation term never activates, and life_stage re-
ceives no spurious attribution. Note that violation prevalence
itself does not depend on δ: increasing δ makes each violation
more costly, not more frequent, which is why misattribution
grows with δ while prevalence stays fixed.
These results generalize beyond two features. We repeat
the experiment over four features (age, life_stage,
empl, total_amt), where attribution ordering between a
particular feature pair is no longer expected to hold in isola-
tion, and examine how the overall attribution vector and fea-
ture ranking change as δ increases (Appendix J.3). RelShap
remains unchanged across all metrics, while all baselines ex-
hibit increasing attribution and ranking shifts; a setting with
additional provenance constraints behaves identically (Ap-
pendix J.3). This shows that eliminating impossible worlds
makes RelShap insensitive to relationally invalid perturba-
tions that are never observed during training or testing.
Beyond the controlled setting, the UW-CSE dataset per-
mits full background and coalition enumeration. RelShap
changes the feature ranking even under exact computation,
showing that the change is not a sampling artifact. Quotient
mode further reduces runtime while preserving the Shapley
values exactly, providing an empirical verification of Prop. 1.
Additional validations on real datasets are in Appendix J.3.


Kernel
MC
Leverage
0
20
40
60
80
100
∆Jaccard, RBO > 0 (%)
Top-3 Jaccard
1-RBO
(a) Aggregated by estimators.
BG
BG + DCs BG + Prov
Strict
BG + Prov
Relaxed
All
0
20
40
60
80
100
∆Jaccard, RBO > 0 (%)
(b) Aggregated by comparison modes.
Amazon
Churn
Churn Modelling
German Credit
MovieLens 20M
SpeedDating
Synthetic
TPC-H
UW-CSE
0
20
40
60
80
100
∆Jaccard, RBO > 0 (%)
(c) Aggregated by datasets.
Figure 4: Percentage of cases with ∆> 0, sliced by estimators, comparison modes, and datasets. Error bars denote 95% CIs.
4.2
Impossible Worlds in Practice
We compare default estimators against five RelShap con-
figurations with progressively richer constraints: BG (rela-
tional background mode); BG + DCs; BG + Prov, Strict/Re-
laxed (Relaxed subsumes Strict); and All (BG + Prov, Re-
laxed + DCs). We first quantify how frequently conventional
Shapley computation is exposed to impossible worlds. Across
the three estimators, average violation prevalence rises from
64–74% under BG to 82–93% under BG + Prov, Relaxed
on datasets without DCs, and from 68–70% under BG to
72–76% under All (Appendix J.4): invalidity becomes more
pervasive as richer constraints are incorporated.
Prevalence alone does not establish that explanations
change; that also depends on the model’s response in the
invalid region. We therefore assess how RelShap changes
Shapley values relative to default estimators, finding shifts
well beyond random ranking perturbation. For each instance,
we measure ranking differences using Top-3 Jaccard dis-
tance and 1 −RBO (rank-biased overlap) (Webber et al.
2010), capturing the three most influential features and the
full top-weighted ranking, respectively. Against the Mallows
null baseline range of Hwang et al. (2026), we define ∆as the
signed deviation from the range midpoint; ∆> 0 indicates
a change larger than expected at random, and we report 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) on the fraction of such cases.
Figure 4 shows the percentage of cases with ∆> 0. This
percentage exceeds 50% across most RelShap configura-
tions, with changes occurring most frequently under MC,
followed by Leverage SHAP and Kernel SHAP. Dataset-
level effects are generally larger for constraint-rich datasets—
reaching nearly 100% for SpeedDating—but are not strictly
monotonic in the number of constraints (Appendix J). The
effects are stable across predictive models, confirming that
RelShap is generally model-agnostic (Appendix J.2). To-
Mode
Top-3 Jaccard 1 −RBO ∆Jaccard ∆RBO
BG
0.452
0.190
0.057
0.050
BG + DCs
0.566
0.216
0.168
0.094
BG + Prov, Strict
0.377
0.142
−0.023
0.011
BG + Prov, Relaxed
0.415
0.155
0.015
0.024
All
0.430
0.172
0.036
0.032
Table 2: Explanation differences by comparison mode (De-
fault vs. mode), averaged over datasets, models, and estima-
tors; standard deviations in Appendix Table 9.
gether with Section 4.1, these results indicate that the ob-
served ranking differences reflect meaningful corrections to-
ward relationally valid explanations.
Table 2 reports the magnitude of these changes by con-
figuration: domain and denial constraints yield the largest
corrections, provenance effects depend on the mode, and
∆> 0 on average in all but one mode–metric pair. On
TPC-H, provenance mode replaces the top-3 features almost
entirely (Top-3 Jaccard 0.91–0.96 under Kernel SHAP and
MC; Appendix Table 11).
4.3
Effectiveness of Running Time Optimization
Quotient mode (Q) applies the quotient space coalition pro-
jection of Def. 2 as an orthogonal acceleration on top of
any configuration (Appendix J.2). Across datasets and mod-
els, this optimization consistently reduces runtime for MC
and Leverage SHAP, particularly on computationally costly
datasets (e.g., Amazon, TPC-H); Kernel SHAP also benefits
from Q but is more variable, consistent with the estimator-
dependent analysis in Section 3.3. Added relational pro-
cessing does not typically impose a runtime penalty, and
the reduction from Q grows with both background size and
coalition budget. Finally, observed reductions align with our
combinatorial analysis: the empirical counterpart of RM in
Thm. 1 correlates closely with measured reduction (Pearson:
mean 0.806, median 0.875; Kendall τ: mean 0.741, median
0.833), reliably predicting when reduction occurs, though its
magnitude depends on the dataset and sampling strategy.
5
Conclusion
Conventional Shapley value methods treat feature coalitions
as unrestricted subsets, in effect querying relationally impos-
sible worlds. RelShap is the first estimator-agnostic frame-
work to systematically enforce relational consistency. Exten-
sive experiments show that the resulting explanations differ
meaningfully from those of unconstrained estimators, and
that in settings with known ground truth, the difference is
an improvement. Quotient mode preserves Shapley values
exactly while provably reducing runtime.
Limitations.
Our validation establishes improvement
with respect to relational validity and synthetic ground truth,
not human judgment; a user study is important future work.
RelShap also treats the extracted, user-vetted constraints
as correct: spurious FDs discovered from small data would
propagate to explanations. See Appendix L for details.


Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF Awards No. 2312930 and
2326193. This work was supported in part through the NYU
IT High Performance Computing resources, services, and
staff expertise.
References
Aas, K.; et al. 2021. Explaining individual predictions when
features are dependent: More accurate approximations to
Shapley values. Artificial Intelligence, 298: 103502.
Alizad, A.; and Milani, M. 2025. Relation-Stratified Sam-
pling for Shapley Values Estimation in Relational Databases.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.22035.
Armstrong, W. W. 1974.
Dependency structures of data
base relationships. In IFIP congress, volume 74, 580–583.
Geneva, Switzerland.
Bertossi, L.; Kimelfeld, B.; Livshits, E.; and Monet, M. 2023.
The Shapley value in database management. ACM Sigmod
Record, 52(2): 6–17.
Bischl, B.; Casalicchio, G.; Feurer, M.; Gijsbers, P.; Hutter,
F.; Lang, M.; Mantovani, R. G.; van Rijn, J. N.; and Van-
schoren, J. 2021. OpenML Benchmarking Suites. Proceed-
ings of the NeurIPS 2021 Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Chen, H.; Janizek, J. D.; Lundberg, S.; and Lee, S.-I. 2020.
True to the model or true to the data?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.16234.
Chen, T.; et al. 2016. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting
system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 785–
794.
Cheney, J.; et al. 2009. Provenance in Databases: Why, How,
and Where. Foundations and Trends in Databases, 1(4):
379–474.
Covert, I.; et al. 2020. Improving kernelshap: Practical shap-
ley value estimation via linear regression. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.01536.
CTU. 2003. UW-CSE. https://relational.fel.cvut.cz/dataset/
UW-CSE. Last accessed: April 2026.
Datta, A.; et al. 2016. Algorithmic Transparency via Quanti-
tative Input Influence: Theory and Experiments with Learn-
ing Systems. In IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
SP 2016, San Jose, CA, USA, May 22-26, 2016, 598–617.
IEEE Computer Society.
Davidson, S.; Deutch, D.; Frost, N.; Kimelfeld, B.; Koren,
O.; and Monet, M. 2022. Shapgraph: An holistic view of
explanations through provenance graphs and shapley val-
ues. In Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on
Management of Data, 2373–2376.
Demetrovics, J.; et al. 1985. Minimum matrix representation
of closure operations. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 11(2):
115–128.
Demetrovics, J.; et al. 1992.
Functional dependencies in
relational databases: A lattice point of view. Discrete Applied
Mathematics, 40(2): 155–185.
Deutch, D.; Frost, N.; Kimelfeld, B.; and Monet, M. 2022.
Computing the shapley value of facts in query answering. In
Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Man-
agement of Data, 1570–1583.
Dwivedi, V. P.; Kanatsoulis, C.; Huang, S.; and Leskovec,
J. 2025. Relational deep learning: Challenges, foundations
and next-generation architectures.
In Proceedings of the
31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining V. 2, 5999–6009.
Fey, M.; Hu, W.; Huang, K.; Lenssen, J. E.; Ranjan, R.;
Robinson, J.; Ying, R.; You, J.; and Leskovec, J. 2024. Po-
sition: Relational Deep Learning - Graph Representation
Learning on Relational Databases. In Proceedings of the
41st International Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
ume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
13592–13607. PMLR.
Flajolet, P.; et al. 1992. Birthday Paradox, Coupon Collec-
tors, Caching Algorithms and Self-Organizing Search. Dis-
crete Applied Mathematics, 39(3): 207–229.
Frye, C.; de Mijolla, D.; Begley, T.; Cowton, L.; Stanley,
M.; and Feige, I. 2021. Shapley explainability on the data
manifold. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations.
Fumagalli, F.; Butler, L.; Kang, J. S.; Ramchandran, K.; and
Witter, R. T. 2026a. An Odd Estimator for Shapley Values.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01399.
Fumagalli, F.; et al. 2026b.
PolySHAP: Extending Ker-
nelSHAP with Interaction-Informed Polynomial Regression.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18608.
GitHub. 2023.
SQLGlot.
https://github.com/tobymao/
sqlglot. Last accessed: April 2026.
Gorishniy, Y.; et al. 2022. On embeddings for numerical
features in tabular deep learning. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 35: 24991–25004.
Green, T. J.; et al. 2007. Provenance semirings. In Proceed-
ings of the Twenty-Sixth ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART
Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, PODS ’07,
31–40. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery. ISBN 9781595936851.
Heskes, T.; et al. 2020. Causal shapley values: Exploiting
causal knowledge to explain individual predictions of com-
plex models.
Advances in neural information processing
systems, 33: 4778–4789.
Huhtala, Y.; Kärkkäinen, J.; Porkka, P.; and Toivonen, H.
1999. TANE: An Efficient Algorithm for Discovering Func-
tional and Approximate Dependencies. The Computer Jour-
nal, 42(2): 100–111.
Hwang, H.; Lee, S.; Rosenblatt, L.; Whang, S. E.;
and Stoyanovich, J. 2026.
Explanation Multiplicity in
SHAP: Characterization and Assessment.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.12654.
Janzing, D.; et al. 2020. Feature relevance quantification in
explainable AI: A causal problem. In International Con-
ference on artificial intelligence and statistics, 2907–2916.
PMLR.


Kaggle. 2016. MovieLens 20M Dataset. https://www.kaggle.
com/datasets/grouplens/movielens-20m-dataset.
Last ac-
cessed: April 2026.
Kaggle. 2020. Churn Modelling. https://www.kaggle.com/
datasets/shubh0799/churn-modelling/data.
Last accessed:
April 2026.
Laberge, G.; Aïvodji, U.; Hara, S.; Khomh, F.; et al. 2022.
Fool shap with stealthily biased sampling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.15419.
Liaw, A.; et al. 2002. Classification and regression by ran-
domForest. R news, 2(3): 18–22.
Livshits, E.; Bertossi, L.; Kimelfeld, B.; and Sebag, M. 2021.
The Shapley value of tuples in query answering. Logical
Methods in Computer Science, 17.
Lundberg, S. M.; and Lee, S. 2017. A Unified Approach to
Interpreting Model Predictions. In Guyon, I.; von Luxburg,
U.; Bengio, S.; Wallach, H. M.; Fergus, R.; Vishwanathan,
S. V. N.; and Garnett, R., eds., Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017,
Long Beach, CA, USA, 4765–4774.
Maafa, K.; et al. 2018. Algorithms for computing the Shapley
value of cooperative games on lattices. Discrete Applied
Mathematics, 249: 91–105.
McElfresh, D.; Khandagale, S.; Valverde, J.; Prasad C, V.;
Ramakrishnan, G.; Goldblum, M.; and White, C. 2023.
When do neural nets outperform boosted trees on tabular
data? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
36: 76336–76369.
Motl, J.; et al. 2015. The CTU prague relational learning
repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.03086.
Motwani, R.; et al. 1995. Randomized Algorithms. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Musco, C.; and Witter, R. T. 2025. Provably Accurate Shap-
ley Value Estimation via Leverage Score Sampling. In The
Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations.
OpenML. 2014.
credit-g.
https://www.openml.org/d/31.
Last accessed: April 2026.
OpenML. 2016. SpeedDating. https://www.openml.org/d/
40536. Last accessed: April 2026.
OpenML. 2017. Churn. https://www.openml.org/d/40701.
Last accessed: April 2026.
OpenML. 2022. Amazon Employee Access. https://www.
openml.org/d/43900. Last accessed: April 2026.
Papenbrock, T.; et al. 2015.
Functional dependency dis-
covery: An experimental evaluation of seven algorithms.
PVLDB, 8(10): 1082–1093.
Papenbrock, T.; et al. 2017. Data-driven Schema Normaliza-
tion. In EDBT, volume 17, 342–353.
Robinson, J.; et al. 2024. Relbench: A benchmark for deep
learning on relational databases. NeurIPS, 37: 21330–21341.
Rubachev, I.; Kartashev, N.; Gorishniy, Y.; and Babenko,
A. 2025. Tabred: Analyzing pitfalls and filling the gaps in
tabular deep learning benchmarks. International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Shapley, L. S.; et al. 1953. A value for n-person games.
Princeton University Press Princeton.
Sundararajan, M.; et al. 2020. The many Shapley values for
model explanation. In International conference on machine
learning, 9269–9278. PMLR.
Taufiq, M. F.; et al. 2023. Manifold restricted interventional
shapley values.
In International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, 5079–5106. PMLR.
TPC. 2014. TPC-H. https://www.tpc.org/tpch/. Last ac-
cessed: April 2026.
Vanschoren, J.; Van Rijn, J. N.; Bischl, B.; and Torgo, L.
2014.
OpenML: networked science in machine learning.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 15(2): 49–60.
Webber, W.; et al. 2010. A similarity measure for indefinite
rankings. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS),
28(4): 1–38.
Witter, R. T.; Parafita, Á.; Garriga, T.; Muschalik, M.; Fuma-
galli, F.; Brando, A.; and Rosenblatt, L. 2026. Exactly Com-
puting do-Shapley Values. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07203.
Witter, R. T.; et al. 2025. Regression-adjusted Monte Carlo
Estimators for Shapley Values and Probabilistic Values. In
The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Yuan, H.; et al. 2022. An empirical study of the effect of
background data size on the stability of SHapley Additive ex-
Planations (SHAP) for deep learning models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.11351.
Zern, A.; et al. 2023. Interventional SHAP values and inter-
action values for piecewise linear regression trees. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 37, 11164–11173.


A
Primer on Relational Concepts
This appendix provides background on relational database
concepts used throughout the paper, aimed at readers whose
primary background is in machine learning or explainable
AI rather than data management.
A.1
Relational databases and tables
A relational database organizes data into a collection of
tables (also called relations), each with a fixed set of named
columns (attributes) and a variable set of rows (tuples). For
example, in Example 1, the database contains two tables:
Applicants with attributes a_id, age, life_stage,
empl, and Transactions with attributes t_id, a_id,
amount.
Tables are linked through shared attributes. In the exam-
ple, a_id appears in both tables: it uniquely identifies each
applicant in Applicants and references the correspond-
ing applicant in Transactions. One applicant may have
many transactions (a one-to-many relationship). This multi-
table structure allows the database to store each applicant’s
attributes once, avoiding redundancy.
A.2
Keys and functional dependencies
A key is a set of attributes that uniquely identifies each row
in a table. In Applicants, a_id is the primary key: no
two rows share the same a_id. A key induces functional
dependencies (FDs): if a_id uniquely identifies a row, then
knowing a_id determines all other attributes in that row.
Formally, we write a_id →age, a_id →life_stage,
etc.
FDs are not limited to keys. Any deterministic relationship
between attributes is an FD. For instance, if every 35-year-old
in the data has life stage “middle,” every 63-year-old has life
stage “older,” and so on, then age →life_stage holds.
This FD can be discovered directly from the data, without any
schema declaration. FD discovery is a well-studied problem
in the database community (Huhtala et al. 1999; Papenbrock
et al. 2015).
A.3
Queries and aggregation
A query retrieves and transforms data from one or more ta-
bles. The SQL query in Example 1 joins Applicants with
Transactions (matching rows by a_id), then groups
the result by applicant and computes the sum of transac-
tion amounts (SUM(t.amount) AS total_amt). The
GROUP BY clause produces exactly one output row per ap-
plicant, which means the grouping attributes (here, a_id)
uniquely determine the aggregated value. This creates a
query-induced FD: a_id →total_amt.
After the query executes, the identifier a_id is typically
dropped before model training, since identifiers carry no pre-
dictive signal. However, the FDs that a_id induced remain
latent in the flattened table.
A.4
Integrity constraints beyond FDs
Relational databases support several kinds of constraints be-
yond functional dependencies:
Domain constraints
restrict the values an attribute can
take, possibly conditioned on other attributes. For exam-
ple, if region = ‘North America’ then currency ∈
{‘USD’, ‘CAD’, ‘MXN’}. These constraints capture real-
world restrictions that the data must satisfy.
Denial constraints
express prohibitions: certain combi-
nations of attribute values must never co-occur. A com-
mon example arises with one-hot encoded categorical vari-
ables. If a categorical attribute gender is encoded as
three binary columns (gender_male, gender_female,
gender_nonbinary), then at most one column may
equal 1 in any row. Standard Shapley estimators can produce
completions like (1, 1, 0), violating this mutual exclusivity.
Referential constraints
(foreign keys) require that a value
appearing in one table must exist in another. In the exam-
ple, every a_id in Transactions must correspond to an
existing a_id in Applicants.
A.5
Provenance
Data provenance tracks where each row in a derived dataset
came from. When a query joins and aggregates multiple
source tables to produce a flattened ML-ready table, prove-
nance records, for each output row, which source tuples con-
tributed to it. In Example 1, the row with age = 35 in the
flattened table was derived from applicant a27 and transac-
tions t67, t68, t69.
Provenance is useful because it recovers structural infor-
mation that flattening discards. If we know that a particular
output row came from a single source applicant, we can ap-
ply the source table’s constraints (e.g., the schema-level FD
a_id →empl) to further restrict which feature comple-
tions are valid during Shapley computation.
Provenance tracking is a well-studied area in the database
community (Green et al. 2007; Cheney et al. 2009).
RelShap uses a lightweight form of provenance that traces
flattened rows back to their source tuples via identifier-
induced FDs that are no longer explicit in the feature set
(Section 3).
A.6
What flattening loses
ML pipelines typically receive only the final flattened table.
This flattening discards several kinds of structural informa-
tion:
• FDs that were enforced by the schema or induced by
the query (e.g., age →life_stage) become invisi-
ble; standard Shapley estimators freely generate combi-
nations like (age = 35, life_stage = older) that
violate them.
• Domain constraints such as valid value ranges or con-
ditional restrictions are no longer enforced.
• Denial constraints such as one-hot mutual exclusivity
are not represented in the flat schema.
• Provenance information linking each row to its source
tuples is lost when identifiers are dropped.
RelShap recovers this information, either from the original
relational schema and query (when available) or by discov-
ering constraints directly from the data. Section 3 describes


the extraction procedure; the three sources of constraints
(schema-level, query-level, and data-driven) are detailed in
Section 3.1.
B
Details about background data selection
B.1
Background data selection methods
Since f is defined on the full feature space R|F |, the en-
tries of xS corresponding to j ∈F \ S must be filled in.
Let Pbg(zF \S) denote a background distribution over the
absent features indexed by F \ S, let B be the number of
background samples (possibly all reference data points), and
z(1)
F \S, . . . , z(B)
F \S ∼Pbg. For a coalition S ⊆F, we construct
a completed input ˜x(S, zF \S) ∈R|F | by
˜xj(S, zF \S) =
xj,
if j ∈S,
zj,
if j ∈F \ S,
and define
f(xS) = EzF \S∼Pbg
h
f
 ˜x(S, zF \S)
i
.
Methods differ in their choice of Pbg. We describe the four
most representative instantiations below, and discuss the
conceptual landscape they span at the end of this section.
Interventional approach (Janzing et al. 2020; Zern et al.
2023) treats feature absence as an intervention rather than
as a conditioning event. Under the standard assumption of
feature independence, the distribution of the remaining fea-
tures unchanged, so Pbg reduces to the empirical marginal
distribution of the training data, PMarginal
bg
= πF \S(Dtrain);
we refer to this construction as the marginal approach
throughout the paper. Default Kernel SHAP (Lundberg and
Lee 2017) is its most widely deployed implementation.
Under this choice, dependencies between observed features
in x and the imputed features in z are broken: the completed
input ˜x(S, z) may lie off the data manifold, although it may
coincidentally fall on it.
Conditional approach (Aas et al. 2021) sets Pbg to the
conditional distribution of the absent features given the
observed ones, estimated from Dtrain via, e.g., a multivariate
Gaussian assumption, a Gaussian copula, or an empirical
conditional, PConditional
bg
= bP
 ZF \S | XS = xS

. The
estimated distribution may not faithfully recover the true
underlying one and can introduce spurious dependencies, but
the formulation aims to capture inter-feature dependencies
and is referred to as observational.
Causal approach (Heskes et al. 2020) extends the inter-
ventional formulation by exploiting a known causal graph
among the features: PCausal
bg
= bP
 ZF \S | do(XS = xS)

,
where Pearl’s do(·) propagates the intervention through
the assumed causal mechanisms rather than (as in the
marginal case) leaving ZF \S unchanged. Two cases arise
depending on the structure: cycle (bidirectional, similar to
the conditional approach) and chain (unidirectional).
On-manifold approach (Taufiq et al. 2023) does not
specify a probabilistic form for Pbg. Instead, it restricts
attention to a region of interest Z that approximates the
geometric data manifold and excludes off-manifold samples:
PManifold
bg
= bP
 ZF \S | do(XS = xS), X ∈Z

. Member-
ship in Z is determined by a surrogate manifold classifier
g (e.g., via kernel density estimation), and off-manifold
samples are generated through perturbation; the resulting
explanations may depend on the quality of the classifier.
ManifoldShap (Taufiq et al. 2023) is the canonical instance.
B.2
Perspectives on background data selection
The four formulations above span the true to the model vs.
true to the data axis introduced in Section 1: the marginal
construction (default Kernel SHAP) stays true to the model
by ignoring inter-feature dependencies, while the condi-
tional, causal, and on-manifold approaches each attempt, in
different ways, to stay true to the data by capturing or re-
specting such dependencies. RelShap is orthogonal to this
axis: rather than choosing what distribution to put on the ab-
sent features, it constrains which configurations the chosen
distribution is allowed to place mass on. Given any base back-
ground distribution Pbase
bg
(marginal, conditional, causal, or
manifold), RelShap restricts its support to completions that
satisfy the relational constraints Σ extracted from the schema,
query, and data (Def. 1). The two design dimensions there-
fore compose rather than conflict: RelShap can be layered
on top of any of the four formulations above.
By default we use the marginal (Kernel SHAP (Lund-
berg and Lee 2017)) as the base, since it requires no dis-
tributional assumptions and is widely used; relational re-
striction then rules out completions that are infeasible un-
der the schema and query (e.g., age = 35 paired with
life_stage = older when the FD age →life_stage
has been identified) without estimating any conditional den-
sity. This restriction preserves the no-distributional assump-
tions property advocated by Sundararajan et al. (2020) and
Janzing et al. (2020) while removing the structural off-
manifold inputs Frye et al. (2021) warns about. Appendix B.3
formalizes this on a two-feature linear model.
B.3
True to the data vs. True to the model
Let
X1 ∼Unif{1, 2, . . . , 8}, X2 = g(X1) =
X1
2

.
with
E[X1] = 4.5, E[X2] = 2.5.
Then fix a target point
x = (x1, x2) = (k, b), b =
k
2

.
Kernel SHAP. Absent features are filled independently
from their marginal distributions by ignoring dependencies
present in the data, which follows a true to the model per-
spective.


One-way (unidirectional) FD-aware (X1 →X2). If X1
is observed, X2 is deterministically recovered via g, follow-
ing a true to the data viewpoint. If only X2 is observed, we
assume no information about X1 and fall back to the Ker-
nel SHAP treatment (true to the model). It aligns with the
RelShap approach when only the functional dependency is
known, and also corresponds to the chain case in (Heskes
et al. 2020).
Bidirectionally aware (X1 ↔X2). This aligns with the
cycle case described in (Heskes et al. 2020), reflecting true
to the data perspective where observing either feature de-
termines the other. In this example, knowing the function
g alone is not sufficient, since g is not injective (many-to-
one), and therefore an inverse function g−1 does not exist.
The preimage set g−1(x2) = {x1 | g(x1) = x2} indicates
that observing X2 only reveals a range of possible values for
X1, rather than its exact value. Therefore, in this setting we
assume that the dataset is fully known, i.e., the exact pairs
(X1, X2) are available.
Since the goal of this example is to illustrate how feature
dependence affects attribution, we assume a simple linear
model
f(x1, x2) = αx1 + βx2,
where α, β ∈R, and intentionally exclude nonlinear interac-
tions or the absence of one of the features (i.e., single-feature
settings discussed in (Heskes et al. 2020)), so that the anal-
ysis focuses only on the presence of feature dependence. In
all three cases,
f∅= E[f(X1, X2)] = αE[X1] + βE[X2] = 4.5α + 2.5β.
f{1,2} = f(k, b) = αk + βb.
Kernel SHAP.
f{1} = E[f(k, X2)] = αk + βE[X2] = αk + 2.5β
f{2} = E[f(X1, b)] = αE[X1] + βb = 4.5α + βb
The resulting Shapley values:
ϕMarginal
1
= 1
2(f{1} −f∅) + 1
2(f{1,2} −f{2}) = α(k −4.5)
ϕMarginal
2
= 1
2(f{2} −f∅) + 1
2(f{1,2} −f{1}) = β(b −2.5)
X1 →X2.
If X1 is known, then X2 is determined:
f{1} = f(k, g(k)) = f(k, b) = αk + βb
If only X2 is known, X1 cannot be recovered since the
mapping g is not assumed to be known (otherwise a piecewise
inverse could be specified). Thus the marginal distribution
of X1 is used,
f{2} = E[f(X1, b)] = αE[X1] + βb = 4.5α + βb
The resulting Shapley values:
ϕFD
1
= 1
2(f{1} −f∅) + 1
2(f{1,2} −f{2})
= 1
2[(αk+βb)−(4.5α+2.5β)]+1
2[(αk+βb)−(4.5α+βb)]
= α(k −4.5) + β
2 (b −2.5)
ϕFD
2
= 1
2(f{2} −f∅) + 1
2(f{1,2} −f{1})
= 1
2[(4.5α+βb)−(4.5α+2.5β)]+ 1
2[(αk+βb)−(αk+βb)]
= β
2 (b −2.5)
Difference from the marginal case.
ϕFD
1
−ϕMarginal
1
= β
2 (b −2.5),
ϕFD
2
−ϕMarginal
2
= −β
2 (b −2.5).
Thus part of the attribution that would otherwise be as-
signed to the derived feature X2 is transferred to the root
feature X1 when the dependency X1 →X2 is respected.
The exact magnitude of this effect depends on the model co-
efficient β on X2, and on the deviation of b from its mean
value E[X2] = 2.5.
X1 ↔X2.
f{1} = f{2} = f{1,2} = αk + βb
The resulting Shapley values:
ϕ1 = ϕ2 = 1
2(f{1,2} −f∅) = 1
2(αk + βb −4.5α −2.5β)
Discussion.
The three approaches produce qualitatively different attri-
butions since they incorporate the dependency structure to
different extents, even when all other conditions held fixed.
The marginal approach ignores the relation between the vari-
ables and treats X1 and X2 as independently manipulable.
As a result, the Shapley values are allocated according to the
model coefficients, with only the mean subtracted from each
feature. For X1 ↔X2 case, the two variables become in-
formationally indistinguishable, making the Shapley values
split evenly between the two features. Overall, the resulting
attributions still depend on the model coefficient, reflecting
the true to the model perspective. However, by incorporat-
ing the functional dependency structure (X1 →X2), part
of the attribution that would otherwise be assigned to the
derived attribute X2 is transferred to the root attribute X1.
This reflects a true to the data perspective, where the expla-
nation respects the dependency structure of the underlying
data. Importantly, this simplified redistribution arises since
we considered only two features with a single FD between
them. As the number of features or FDs increases, the reallo-
cation is governed by the joint dependency structure, making
the resulting Shapley value more complex and less directly
traceable.
C
Details about coalition samplers
In this section, we restate the formulations used in existing
works using our notation and describe their coalition sam-
pling procedures based on their code implementations. This
clarification is necessary for our theoretical development in
Section 3.3.


C.1
Kernel SHAP
Kernel SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017) estimates Shapley
values by fitting a weighted linear surrogate whose solution
coincides with ϕ(f). Each coalition is weighted by the Shap-
ley kernel,
wKernel(S) =
|F| −1
 |F |
|S|

|S| (|F| −|S|)
,
which depends only on |S| and concentrates weight on ex-
treme (very small or very large) coalition sizes; coalitions are
sampled accordingly. A coalition is a subset S ⊆F, equiva-
lently represented by a binary mask z′ ∈{0, 1}|F | where |F|
denote the number of features considered in the explanation,
and let S(z′) = {j ∈F | z′
j = 1}.
Coalitions are sampled using a hybrid strategy. First, a
subset size s ∈{1, . . . , |F|−1} is drawn, excluding the triv-
ial coalitions corresponding to the empty and full sets. These
trivial cases are handled separately and computed once since
there is only one coalition of each type, whereas intermediate
sizes contain multiple candidates.
For non-trivial coalitions, Kernel SHAP defines a coalition
sampling distribution PKernel
coal
by first allocating probability
mass across subset sizes according to
PKernel
coal
(|S| = s) ∝
1
s(|F| −s).
Once a subset size s is determined, a coalition S ⊆F with
|S| = s is sampled uniformly at random among all subsets
of that size, i.e.,
PKernel
coal
(S | |S| = s) =
1
 |F |
s
.
Consequently, the overall coalition sampling distribution sat-
isfies
PKernel
coal
(S) ∝
1
 |F |
|S|

|S|(|F| −|S|)
,
which matches the size-dependent structure induced by the
Shapley kernel stated below.
In practice, when the number of features is sufficiently
small, Kernel SHAP deterministically enumerates all coali-
tions of a given size whenever the sampling budget permits.
Concretely, if the requested number of samples exceeds the
number of possible non-trivial coalitions (i.e., 2|F | −2), the
algorithm simply enumerates the entire coalition space in-
stead of performing random sampling. The randomized sam-
pling scheme described above is therefore used only when
the feature dimension is large enough that full enumeration
becomes infeasible.
During random sampling with replacement, duplicate
coalitions may occasionally occur. Although the number
of possible coalitions grows exponentially with the num-
ber of features-making such collisions relatively unlikely in
practice-Kernel SHAP handles them explicitly. When a coali-
tion that has already been observed is drawn again, the algo-
rithm does not add a new row to the regression design matrix.
Instead, it increases the weight associated with the existing
coalition so that the resulting weighted regression correctly
reflects the number of times that coalition was sampled.
Given a coalition budget M, we sample coalitions
S(1), . . . , S(M) ∼PKernel
coal
, Kernel SHAP assigns each coali-
tion a regression weight determined by the Shapley kernel:
wKernel

S(m)
∝π
 |F|, |S(m)|

,
where the Shapley kernel is a size-dependent function de-
fined for nontrivial coalitions (0 < |S(z′)| < |F|) as:
π(z′) = π
 |F|, |S(z′)|

=
|F| −1
 |F |
|S(z′)|

|S(z′)| (|F| −|S(z′)|)
.
Then Kernel SHAP fits a linear surrogate g(z′) = ϕ0 +
P
j∈F ϕjz′
j by minimizing the weighted squared loss
min
ϕ0,{ϕj}j∈F
M
X
m=1
w
 S(m) 
f
 ˜x(S(m))

−ϕ0−
X
j∈F
ϕjz′(m)
j
2
,
subject to the two endpoint constraints induced by π(z′) =
∞:
g(0) = f(˜x(∅))
and
g(1) = f(˜x(F)),
which are equivalent to ϕ0 = f(˜x(∅)) and P
j∈F ϕj =
f(˜x(F)) −f(˜x(∅)). The resulting coefficients {ϕj}j∈F are
the Kernel SHAP attributions.
C.2
Monte Carlo coalition estimator
Monte Carlo (MC) estimator fixes a feature of interest i ∈
F and samples coalitions S ⊆F \ {i} from the Shapley-
weighted distribution
PMC
coal(S | i) = |S|!(|F| −|S| −1)!
|F|!
,
wMC(S) = 1.
Since PMC
coal matches the coefficients in Eq. (1), the result-
ing estimator is unbiased for ϕi(f). It is conceptually sim-
ple but may require many samples to converge. In practice,
coalition sizes are sampled approximately uniformly. Each
Monte Carlo draw first samples a pivot (a feature to explain)
i ∼Unif(F). Conditioned on i, the estimator samples coali-
tions S ⊆F \ {i} by first sampling a coalition size
K ∼Unif({0, 1, . . . , |F| −1}),
and then sampling a subset S uniformly at random among all
size-K subsets of F \ {i}. This two-stage procedure induces
a distribution over coalitions S ⊆F \ {i}. For any fixed i
and coalition S ⊆F \ {i}, the probability that S is sampled
is
P(S | i) = P(|S| = k | i) · P(S | |S| = k, i)
=
1
|F| ·
1
 |F |−1
|S|
 = |S|!(|F| −|S| −1)!
|F|!
,
which exactly matches the Shapley coefficient in Eq. (1).
Each Monte Carlo draw samples a pivot uniformly, a coali-
tion size uniformly, and a subset uniformly within that size,
inducing a Shapley-weighted distribution over coalitions.


C.3
Leverage SHAP
Leverage SHAP (Musco and Witter 2025) solves the same
regression formulation as Kernel SHAP but adopts a lever-
age score-based sampling strategy with provable accuracy
guarantees. It first selects a coalition size with approximately
equal probability and then samples a coalition uniformly at
random among all coalitions of that size, so all sizes appear
with comparable frequency rather than the extremes being
overrepresented. The regression weight (the leverage score)
depends only on |S|. Let Z ∈Rρ×|F | and y ∈Rρ denote
the full regression system (as in Kernel SHAP) over all coali-
tions with 0 < |S| < |F| (which brings ρ = 2|F | −2), where
each row corresponds to a coalition indicator vector. To en-
force the efficiency constraint, define the projection matrix
P = I −
1
|F |11⊤and consider the unconstrained system
A = ZP and b = y −Z1 v(1)−v(0)
|F |
.
Leverage SHAP samples coalitions according to a distri-
bution PLeverage
coal
over 0 < |S| < |F|. In this problem, the
leverage scores admit a closed form: all coalitions of the
same size share the same score, and the total sampling mass
is allocated by coalition size. Consequently, the sampling
design is stratified by coalition size. Let ms denote the num-
ber of sampled coalitions of size s among the M draws with
P|F |−1
s=1
ms = M for a given budget M. Within each stratum
corresponding to coalition size s, ms coalitions are sampled
uniformly without replacement from the
 |F |
s

possible coali-
tions of that size. Then every coalition S with |S| = s has
the same inclusion probability
PLeverage
coal
(S) = p(S) = m|S|
 |F |
|S|
.
Given the sampled coalitions S(1), . . . , S(M) generated
by this stratified sampling design, the estimator solves a
reweighted least-squares problem with per-sample weight
wLeverage

S(m)
∝
π
 |S(m)|

PLeverage
coal
 S(m),
where π(·) denotes the Shapley kernel defined in Ap-
pendix C.1. The estimator then solves
ˆϕ⊥= arg min
β
M
X
m=1
wLeverage

S(m) 
⟨a(S(m)), β⟩−b(S(m))
2,
where a(S) and b(S) denote the corresponding row of A
and entry of b. Finally, it returns
ˆϕ = ˆϕ⊥+ v(1) −v(0)
|F|
1,
which satisfies the efficiency constraint by construction. In
practice, ridge regularization may be added if the subsampled
normal matrix is ill-conditioned.
C.4
Perspectives on coalition selection
The three estimators above span a design space defined by
bias, variance, and accuracy guarantees: Kernel SHAP is
faster but biased toward extreme coalition sizes; MC is un-
biased but slow to converge; Leverage SHAP equalizes cov-
erage across sizes and offers provable accuracy guarantees.
Recent estimators improve this space along orthogonal di-
rections: Witter et al. (2025) reduce variance via residual
estimation against a learned surrogate, while PolySHAP (Fu-
magalli et al. 2026b) and OddSHAP (Fumagalli et al. 2026a)
use higher-order polynomial regression and Fourier-basis re-
duction, respectively, to improve accuracy and efficiency.
RelShap is orthogonal to all of these: rather than in-
troducing a new sampling distribution or weighting scheme,
it acts as a plug-in restriction layer that prunes the coalition
space to relationally valid configurations before any estimator
is applied (Def. 1). It therefore composes with any of these
estimators without modifying their sampling distributions,
weights, and accuracy guarantees, and contributes orthogo-
nal acceleration by collapsing coalitions that are equivalent
under the relational constraints (Section 3). The most directly
comparable approach is that of Witter et al. (2026), which
likewise reduce the coalition space via equivalence classes,
but using structural causal models that require explicit causal
assumptions and intervention semantics; RelShap derives
its equivalence structure from declared schema constraints
and observed FDs in the data, with no causal assumption
required.
D
Details about relational constraints
D.1
Data-level relational constraints
Discovered functional dependencies
For any L ⊆F and
attribute a /∈L, let D/L denote the partition of D induced
by equality on L. We say that L →a holds exactly in D if,
for every equivalence class C ∈D/L, attribute a takes at
most one distinct value within C:
∀C ∈D/L,
DISTINCTa(C)
 ≤1,
where DISTINCTa(C) denotes the set of distinct values of
attribute a within group C.
We restrict the left-hand side to at most a user-specified
bound—default 2, except for UW-CSE (3)—and consider
only single-attribute right-hand sides; multi-attribute right-
hand sides can be derived via Armstrong’s axioms (Arm-
strong 1974) during background data selection (Section 3.2).
We retain only minimal FDs: for a fixed a, if L →a holds
and there exists L′ ⊂L such that L′ →a also holds, then
L →a is discarded. FDs discovered at this stage may over-
lap with those extracted at the schema and query levels; we
retain all and let the user decide which levels to include.
Approximate FDs.
To tolerate limited violations, we ad-
ditionally support approximate FDs. For a candidate pair
(L, a), the approximation error is
err(L →a) =

C ∈D/L
 DISTINCTa(C)
 > 1
	
|D/L|
.
We record L →a as an approximate FD if err(L →a) ≤
ε, where ε is a user-defined tolerance threshold. While our
implementation supports approximate FDs, we restrict all
experiments to exact FDs.


Conditional domain rules
For each discovered FD A →
B where dom(B) has bounded cardinality (at most a user-
defined threshold, default 20), we iterate over values s ∈
dom(B) and construct implications of the form
(B = s) ⇒φ(A),
where φ(A) is a domain restriction on A estimated from the
tuples in D satisfying B = s. Two cases arise:
• Categorical A. φ(A) restricts A to the set of distinct
values co-occurring with B = s in the data.
• Continuous A. φ(A) restricts A to an empirical interval
[ℓs, us], where ℓs and us are computed either from the
minimum and maximum values or from user-specified
lower and upper quantiles to reduce sensitivity to outliers.
For example, from an FD age →life_stage, sup-
pose that the observed domain of life_stage in D is
dom(life_stage) = {young, middle, older}. For
each s ∈dom(life_stage), we construct
(life_stage = s) ⇒
 ℓs ≤age ≤us

,
where ℓs and us are estimated empirically from tuples in D
with life_stage = s.
Denial constraints
We identify denial constraints via cy-
cles in the exact FD set. For a set of attributes {A, B, C}, if
A →B, B →C, and C →A all hold in D, the attributes
are mutually determined and form a cyclic dependency. For
each cycle, we test for two characteristic patterns:
• Scaled one-hot. Each entry takes values in {0, κ} for
some κ ∈Z>0, and in every tuple at most one column in
the set is nonzero.
• n-ary exclusive or (XOR). All entries are in {0, 1}, and
the sum over the c columns has a fixed parity modulo 2.
Caveat. A categorical variable could be manually one-hot
encoded by the user to avoid imposing an artificial ordi-
nal structure (e.g., encoding categories as 1, 2, 3) on inher-
ently unordered categories. Suppose that the model is trained
directly on these columns without integrating the prepro-
cessing step into a pipeline using ColumnTransformer
from the scikit-learn package. In this case, Shap-
ley value computations without background data selection
in RelShap may produce infeasible inputs, since f refers
only to the prediction model and does not include the pre-
processing transformation. For example, under the stan-
dard Kernel SHAP procedure (Lundberg and Lee 2017),
if we explain an instance with gender_male
=
1
and consider a female background data point, the com-
pleted input becomes (gender_male,gender_female,
gender_nonbinary) = (1, 1, 0), which does not corre-
spond to any valid gender category. Such combinations
violate the implicit one-hot constraint but are not prevented
by conventional SHAP implementations. This motivates re-
flecting relational constraints, especially denial constraints,
during background data selection.
D.2
On the choice of reference data
We first clarify that including test data in FD discovery or
lookup table (LUT) construction does not lead to a data
leakage. These steps are performed solely during the Shapley
value computation and are independent of model training.
Referencing test data in the post-hoc explanation phase does
not alter the trained model parameters or influence predictive
performance.
Second, the choice of reference data itself has negligible
impact when the training and full data distributions remain
aligned. Prior work such as Fool SHAP (Laberge et al. 2022)
shows that SHAP explanations can be substantially distorted
when the background data is adversarially manipulated or
heavily skewed. Thus, the key issue is not which reference
dataset is selected - Dtrain or D - but whether the reference
distribution exhibits substantial shift from the model’s train-
ing distribution. In this work, we do not consider significant
distributional shifts, and thus such choice does not materially
affect the explanations and is treated as a design choice.
Existing approaches including Kernel SHAP (Lundberg
and Lee 2017) and the conditional approach (Aas et al. 2021),
typically use only Dtrain as the background data. While the
intention is to respect the training data distribution on which
the model was fitted, explanations are ultimately evaluated
on test instances. Consequently, absent features are filled
using reference data points solely from Dtrain, which may
introduce unrealistic or distributionally mismatched combi-
nations, making such replacements semantically ambiguous.
Table 3 summarizes the four possible combinations of
these choices and their potential implications, which may or
may not arise in practice depending on the specific configu-
ration. In our experiments, we use D for discovery and Dtrain
for LUT construction by default. We evaluate each combi-
nation along three properties: Mismatch indicates whether
the discovered relational constraints may not be realizable
using values available in the LUT, potentially yielding in-
valid or undefined instantiations during background or coali-
tion construction for test data points. It occurs only when
Discovery ⊈LUT. Hit indicates whether all values required
to instantiate missing features of a test instance are present in
the LUT, so that background data points can be constructed
without failure. In particular, this is guaranteed when the
LUT is constructed from the full dataset D. Test indicates
whether test data are used to construct either the discovered
constraints or the LUT.
E
Additional mathematical details
Definition 3 (Σ-coalition equivalence). Under the relation-
ally consistent background semantics in Def. 1, we define an
equivalence relation over coalitions. Given Σ and a feature
of interest i ∈F, for any coalitions S, S′ ⊆F \ {i}, S and
S′ are Σ-equivalent, i.e., S ∼Σ S′, if they induce the same
set of relationally valid completions under Σ. Formally,
˜x(S, zF \S)
 ˜x(S, zF \S) |= Σ
	
=
˜x(S′, zF \S′)
 ˜x(S′, zF \S′) |= Σ
	
.
Definition 4 (Σ-coalition equivalence class). Following
Def. 3, for any coalition S ⊆F \ {i}, its Σ-equivalence
class is defined as:
[S]Σ = {T ⊆F \ {i} | T ∼Σ S}.


Table 3: Four possible combinations of discovery data for
data-driven constraint extraction and lookup table (LUT) for
background data selection, evaluated in terms of possible
mismatch, hit (coverage), and the use of test data. ✓indi-
cates that the corresponding phenomenon may occur, while
✗denotes that it cannot occur. For mismatch and test, non-
occurrence is preferable, whereas for hit, occurrence is de-
sirable.
Discovery–LUT
Mismatch
Hit
Test
Dtrain–Dtrain
✗
✗
✗
Dtrain–D
✗
✓
✓
D–Dtrain
✓
✓
✓
D–D
✗
✓
✓
Definition 5 (Σ-coalition space). Σ-coalition space is the
quotient space of the original coalition space {S ⊆F \
{i}} under the equivalence relation ∼Σ, which collapses
coalitions that are indistinguishable under Σ. Formally,
CΣ = {S ⊆F \ {i}}

∼Σ= {[S]Σ | S ⊆F \ {i}}.
As noted in Section 3.2, non-trivial ∼Σ implies |CΣ| <
2|F |−1 in the deterministic setting, without considering ran-
domness in coalition sampling; see Appendix F.2 for the
proof.
F
Proofs
F.1
Proof of Prop. 1
Proof. By Def. 3, for any S, S′ ⊆F \ {i} with S ∼Σ S′,
f(˜x(S, z)) = f(˜x(S′, z′)) for all relationally valid comple-
tions z, z′ under Σ. Let {C1, . . . , CK} be the partition of
{S ⊆F \ {i}} induced by ∼Σ. Starting from the Shap-
ley value definition and grouping coalitions by their Σ-
equivalence classes, we obtain:
ϕi =
K
X
k=1
X
S∈Ck
w(S)

f(˜x(S ∪{i}, z)) −f(˜x(S, z))

=
K
X
k=1
 X
S∈Ck
w(S)
! 
f(˜x( ˆSk ∪{i}, z)) −f(˜x( ˆSk, z))

,
where ˆSk is any representative of Ck. Since the original
Shapley sum can be partitioned according to Σ-equivalence
classes and the inner expression is identical for all S ∈Ck,
the above expression coincides with the Shapley computation
over CΣ.
F.2
Proof of Coalition Space Reduction
Here we prove the claim in Section 3.2 that non-trivial ∼Σ
implies |CΣ| < 2|F |−1.
Proof. The original coalition domain {S ⊆F \ {i}} has
cardinality |{S ⊆F \ {i}}| = 2|F |−1. The Σ-coalition
space CΣ consists of the ∼Σ-equivalence classes over this
domain, which form a partition; thus each element of the
domain belongs to exactly one equivalence class. If ∼Σ is
Algorithm 2: CanonicalizeCoal
1: S ←{fj ∈F | mj = 1}
2: if S in CanonMap then
3:
C ←CanonMap[S]
4: else
5:
C ←FDClosure(S)
▷Appendix Alg. 3
6:
CanonMap[S] ←C
7: end if
8: Set mj ←1 for all fj ∈C
9: return m
non-trivial, then there exist distinct S, S′ ⊆F \{i} such that
S ∼Σ S′. Hence at least one equivalence class contains at
least two elements. Since the equivalence classes partition
the domain, having a block of size at least two implies that
the number of blocks is strictly smaller than the number of
elements being partitioned. Therefore, |CΣ| < 2|F |−1.
G
Algorithms
Each coalition mask sampled by the base estimator is canon-
icalized: it is expanded to its FD-closed representative un-
der ΣFD, so that Σ-equivalent coalitions map to the same
canonical mask (Alg. 2). A coalition mask m is a binary
vector over the features F: mj = 1 marks feature fj as ob-
served (provided by the base sampler) and mj = 0 marks
it as unobserved (to be completed from the background
data points). Alg. 2 maps each mask to its FD-closed form
by computing FDClosure(S) (Appendix Alg. 3), where
S = {fj | mj = 1}, and setting to 1 every entry in the
closure. A memoization cache CanonMap stores computed
closures, so each distinct input coalition incurs the closure
computation at most once.
Algorithm 3: FDClosure: Canonicalizing a coalition under
the Armstrong’s axioms
1: Input: coalition feature set S
2: Output: FD-closed coalition C
3: C ←S; initialize an empty queue Q
4: for each FD rule L →r in ΣFD do
5:
τL→r ←|L \ C|
▷# of unsatisfied LHS attributes
6:
if τL→r = 0 and r /∈C then
7:
C ←C ∪{r}; enqueue r into Q
8:
end if
9: end for
10: while Q not empty do
11:
attrnew ←dequeue from Q
12:
for each FD rule L →r with attrnew ∈L do
13:
τL→r ←τL→r −1
14:
if τL→r = 0 and r /∈C then
15:
C ←C ∪{r}; enqueue r into Q
16:
end if
17:
end for
18: end while
19: return C
In this section, we provide the algorithmic and implemen-


tation details. In Alg. 3, for each FD rule L →r, the algo-
rithm maintains a counter τL→r = |L \ C|, which records
how many attributes in the left-hand side (LHS) are not yet
present in the current closure C. When this counter reaches
zero, the rule is triggered and r is added to C. When a new
attribute attrnew is added to C, it is enqueued and used to
update only those FD rules whose LHS contains attrnew,
by decrementing their counters. This incremental propaga-
tion avoids repeatedly scanning all FD rules and yields an
efficient computation of the FD closure. As noted earlier,
we restrict the right-hand side (RHS) of each FD to be a
single attribute, while allowing the LHS to include up to a
user-specified maximum number of attributes (default 2).
Algorithm 4: BuildHits: Build per-identifier candidate sets
via inverted index
1: function BuildHits(D, S, ˆx, τ, mode)
2:
hits ←[]
3:
for each id ∈D do
4:
Kid ←{f ∈S | f determines id}
5:
if Kid = ∅then continue
6:
end if
7:
Cid ←T
f∈Kid I[id][f][ˆxf]
▷O(|Kid|)
8:
if mode = Strict and 0 < |Cid| ≤τ then
9:
append (id, Kid, Cid) to hits
10:
else if mode = Relaxed and |Cid| > 0 then
11:
Rconst
id
←
features
constant
across
RS[id][Cid]
12:
append (id, Kid, Cid, Rconst
id
) to hits
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
return hits
16: end function
Algorithm 5: ApplyByIntersection: Multi-identifier joint
rule application
1: function
ApplyByIntersec-
tion(hits, RS, S, m, ΣFD, τ, mode)
2:
P ←T
(id,...) ∈hits RS[id][Cid]
▷Alg. 4
3:
if P = ∅then return m
4:
end if
5:
for each (id, Kid, Cid, Rconst
id
) ∈hits do
6:
for each (L →r) ∈ΣFD involving id with
L ⊆S do
7:
if (mode = Strict and |{id(p) | p ∈P}| ≤
τ)
8:
or (mode = Relaxed and r is constant
on P) then
9:
mr ←1
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
return m
14: end function
Alg. 4 resolves candidate entity identifiers for each
dropped identifier column using a pre-built inverted
index
I[id][f][v]
→
frozenset of id-values,
requiring
O
 P
id∈D |Kid|

frozenset intersection operations per
coalition (covering both single and composite keys on the
LHS), and avoiding any per-coalition scan or groupby oper-
ation over the reference data. Alg. 5 handles the case where
two or more identifiers are simultaneously active. It intersects
pre-built row-index sets RS (from Alg. 4) across all active
identifiers to obtain the jointly consistent row set P, and ap-
plies FD rules whose conclusions are consistent within P.
After calling BuildHits and ApplyByIntersection, Alg. 6
applies FD rules per identifier using the updated S, and if
under Relaxed mode, it additionally activates features that
are constant across over-threshold entity groups. The result
for each (mask, instance) pair is cached to avoid recomputa-
tion across the many coalitions that share the same pattern.
Alg. 7 only repairs values in the absent feature coordinates
(mj = 0) so that the constructed inputs satisfy Σdom ∪Σden
under the chosen repair policy. For numeric constraints, we
consider the following three repair policies:
Minimal edit (projection). The value is projected to the
nearest feasible point within the allowed interval. For exam-
ple, under
{life_stage = middle} ⇒18 ≤age ≤64,
if an instance has life_stage=middle but has age =
16, and the age attribute is repairable (i.e., mj = 0), the
value is minimally adjusted to the nearest valid boundary,
namely age = 18, thereby enforcing the smallest possible
modification.
Random feasible resampling. A new value is sampled
uniformly at random from feasible values observed in the
lookup table (reference data), subject to satisfying the con-
straint. In the above example, any value appearing in the
reference table within the range [18, 64] may be selected.
Distance-weighted random resampling. A new feasible
value is sampled from the reference table with probability
proportional to a distance-based weight, so that values closer
to the original value are more likely to be selected. In the
above example, values such as 18 or 19 are more likely than
distant values such as 60. Let o be the original value and let
V = {v1, . . . , vK} be the set of feasible values in the lookup
table. Define dk = |vk −o| and wk =
1
1+dk , and sample vk
with probability Pr[v = vk] =
wk
PK
j=1 wj .
For categorical constraints including denial constraints,
there is typically no natural notion of distance. For example,
under a constraint of the form
{region = ‘EU’} ⇒currency ∈{EUR, CHF, GBP}
or
gender_male, _female, _nonbinary ∈{0, 1},
gender_male + _female + _nonbinary = 1.
a feasible category is selected uniformly at random from
the admissible values observed in the reference data.
Furthermore, in the implementation, Kernel SHAP inter-
nally represents coalitions using masks defined only over
varying features, i.e., features whose values can differ from
the instance under the background distribution. RelShap fol-
lows the same convention by first identifying such varying


features and operating on the corresponding varying feature
masks before applying relational canonicalization and refine-
ment. In addition, throughout RelShap, masks are encoded
as compact bit masks to support fast canonicalization, mem-
oization, and lookup.
H
Closure system and lattice induced by
functional dependencies
H.1
Closure system
Remark 1. Importantly, under Armstrong’s axioms (Arm-
strong 1974), The family of FD-closed sets induced by clΣ
forms a closure system (i.e., it is closed under arbitrary inter-
sections), and the set of closed sets ordered by inclusion (⊆)
forms a lattice. In this lattice, the meet operation corresponds
to set intersection, and the join operation corresponds to the
closure of the union of two sets i.e., for any C1, C2 ∈CΣ,
consider an FD-based closure operator clΣ (equivalent to
FDClosure in Appendix Alg. 3), then
C1 ∧C2 = C1 ∩C2,
C1 ∨C2 = clΣ(C1 ∪C2).
In particular, clΣ is monotone: for any S, T ⊆F \ {i},
S ⊆T →clΣ(S) ⊆clΣ(T).
These setups differentiate RelShap from existing frame-
works. Witter et al. (Witter et al. 2026) also exploit equiva-
lence classes and lattice structure, but in a different setting.
Their equivalence classes arise from causal relationships in
a structural causal model (SCM), where interventions on
some variables can render others redundant, not from the
Armstrong-style functional dependency closure system (i.e.,
a Moore family) used in RelShap. In addition, Maafa et al.
(2018) study lattice-structured coalition spaces to reduce
computations, but not for ML predictions. Importantly, both
works redefine the coalition space of the cooperative game
itself, while RelShap operates on the original coalition
space induced by estimators.
H.2
Lattice induced by functional dependencies
Lemma 1 (Structure of CΣ (Demetrovics et al. 1992,
Thm. 3.1)). CΣ can be identified with the family of Σ-closed
sets as:
CΣ = 2F \{i} \
[
L→R∈ΣFD, r∈R\L
[L, (F \ {i}) \ {r}],
where [L, (F \ {i}) \ {r}] = { S ⊆F \ {i} | L ⊆S ⊆
(F \ {i}) \ {r} }.
Intuitively, for each FD L →R, any set that contains
L but omits some attribute r ∈R violates the dependency
and therefore cannot be a closed set. Several representative
FD patterns for which closed-form expressions or simple
counting formulas can be derived are given in Demetrovics
et al. (Demetrovics et al. 1992). These include: single FD;
unary chains (derived from Prop. 6.1 in (Demetrovics et al.
1992); Σ = {L1 →L2, L2 →L3, . . . , Lp−1 →Lp});
disjoint unary chains (multiple unary chains on pairwise
disjoint attribute sets); and nested left-hand sides (derived
from Prop. 6.10; Σ = {L1 →r1, L2 →r2, . . . , Lp →
rp, }, L1 ⊆L2 ⊆· · · ⊆Lp). Here we restrict our analysis
to the single FD case, and let U denote the coalition universe
F \{i}. Moreover, following (Demetrovics et al. 1985), when
Σ decomposes over attribute-disjoint blocks, both |CΣ| and
NC(k) can be computed by combining the corresponding
quantities of each block, reducing the counting problem to
smaller independent components. Specifically, if
Σ =
p[
j=1
Σj, CΣ ∼=
p
Y
j=1
CΣj,
then
|CΣ| =
p
Y
j=1
|CΣj|, NC(k) =
X
k1+···+kp=k
p
Y
j=1
N (j)
Cj (kj),
where C = (C1, . . . , Cp) with Cj ∈CΣj.
Proposition 2 (Single FD (Demetrovics et al. 1992, Derived
from Thm. 3.1)). Suppose Σ = {L →R}, where L, R ⊆U
and L ∩R = ∅. Then the number of Σ-closed sets is
|CΣ| = 2|U| −2 |U|−|L| + 2 |U|−|L|−|R|.
Moreover, for each C ∈CΣ,
NC(k) =





1{k = |C|},
L ⊈C,

|R|
k −(|C| −|R|)

,
L ⊆C,
where
 a
b

= 0 if b < 0 or b > a.
Proof. A set S ⊆U is Σ-closed iff L ⊆S →R ⊆S. A
subset violates the dependency if it contains L but omits
at least one attribute of R. The number of sets contain-
ing L is 2|U|−|L|, and among them those containing R
are 2|U|−|L|−|R|. Hence the number of violating sets is
2|U|−|L| −2|U|−|L|−|R|, and subtracting these from 2|U|
yields the result.
If L ⊈C, then no subset of C can trigger the FD, so
clΣ(S) = S for all S ⊆C, and thus the only generator of
C is S = C. If L ⊆C, then necessarily R ⊆C since C is
closed, and clΣ(S) = C holds exactly for S = (C \ R) ∪T
with T ⊆R, which gives the binomial count.
H.3
Proof of Thm. 1
Proof. For each C ∈CΣ, define the indicator random vari-
able
IC = 1{∃m ≤M | [S(m)]Σ = C}.
Then the number of distinct observed classes is KM =
P
C∈CΣ IC. By linearity of expectation,
E[KM] =
X
C∈CΣ
E[IC] =
X
C∈CΣ
Pr(IC = 1)
=
X
C∈CΣ
 1 −(1 −q(C))M
.
Conditioning on the coalition size,
q(C) =
|F |−1
X
k=0
Pr([S]Σ = C | |S| = k) pk.


For every C ∈CΣ, since r(C) is the size of a minimal
generator of C, we have NC(k) = 0 for all k < r(C). Then
the support of the sum can be restricted to k ≥r(C),
q(C) =
|F |−1
X
k=r(C)
pk
NC(k)
 |F |−1
k
.
Since S is drawn uniformly conditional on |S| = k,
Pr([S]Σ = C | |S| = k) = NC(k)
 |F |−1
k
.
This is a coupon collector-type proof (Flajolet et al. 1992;
Motwani et al. 1995).
Remark 2. Monte Carlo coalition sampling draws coali-
tions independently, and therefore the samples are i.i.d. Ker-
nel SHAP involves additional implementation steps including
handling duplicate coalitions, but the underlying sampling
procedure draws coalitions independently with replacement,
and we therefore model the samples as i.i.d. Leverage SHAP
employs stratified sampling without replacement within each
coalition-size stratum. Since the coalition space grows ex-
ponentially with the number of features, the probability of
sampling the same coalition more than once is negligible
for practical budgets. We therefore approximate the resulting
sampling process by an i.i.d. coalition sampling model.
Remark 3. Considering the Shapley value definition in Sec-
tion 2, the overall runtime improvement is proportional to
RM up to constant multiplicative factors. First, Shapley value
computation requires averaging over background data, yield-
ing a cost proportional to the number of background points
used. Second, for Monte Carlo estimator, each marginal con-
tribution involves both S and S ∪{i}, introducing at most
a factor of two (which could be smaller in practice due to
caching or invariant features in the actual computation),
whereas this does not apply to Kernel SHAP and Leverage
SHAP since marginal contributions are implicitly accounted
for within the solver and are not computed via explicit pair-
wise evaluations.
H.4
Estimator-specific expected runtime
reduction
Corollary 1 (Monte Carlo coalition estimator). From Sec-
tion C.2,
pk =
1
|F|, q(C) =
1
|F|
|F |−1
X
k=r(C)
NC(k)
 |F |−1
k
.
Corollary 2 (Kernel SHAP). From Section C.1,
pk =
1
Z|F |−1
1
k(|F| −1 −k),
for k = 1, . . . , |F| −2 where the normalization factor
Z|F |−1 =
1
|F| −1
|F |−2
X
t=1
1
t +
1
|F| −1 −t

=
2
|F| −1
|F |−2
X
t=1
1
t = 2H|F |−2
|F| −1 .
and H|F |−2 is the harmonic number.
Corollary 3 (Leverage SHAP). Let mk denote the number of
sampled coalitions of size k, with P|F |−1
k=0
mk = M. Hence
pk = mk
M , q(C) =
|F |−1
X
k=r(C)
mk
M
NC(k)
 |F |−1
k
,
Interpretation
Since M is fixed, the degree of runtime re-
duction is determined by q(C). If many classes C have small
q(C), new classes tend to appear across samples and few
repetitions occur, yielding RM ≈0 and little runtime reduc-
tion. In contrast, if some classes have large q(C), the same
classes are repeatedly sampled and the projection merges
these repetitions, increasing RM.
The probability q(C) is structurally determined by the in-
teraction between the coalition-size distribution pk and the
collapse counts NC(k). Here pk describes how frequently
coalitions of size k are sampled by the estimator, while
NC(k) counts how many coalitions of size k collapse to
the same closure class C. Therefore, if pk concentrates prob-
ability mass on coalition sizes where NC(k) is large, the
resulting q(C) becomes large and the same classes are re-
peatedly sampled, leading to greater runtime reduction. Con-
versely, if pk spreads probability mass broadly across sizes
or NC(k) remains small across levels, then q(C) stays small
and new classes continue to appear, resulting in little runtime
reduction.
Consider Example 1 with the discovered FD age →
life_stage over {age, life_stage, empl, total_amt}.
Without RelShap, the base sampler treats all 24 = 16
coalitions as distinct. Under quotient-space projection,
any coalition containing age is expanded to also include
life_stage, so {age} and {age, life_stage} collapse
to the same equivalence class, as do {age, empl} and
{age, life_stage, empl}, and so on. The effective num-
ber of distinct classes |CΣ| drops from 16 to 12 (see Ap-
pendix Prop. 2), and any duplicate draw reuses the cached
evaluation. Thm. 1 generalizes this: q(C) measures how
likely a sampled coalition is to land in class C, and RM
quantifies the expected fraction of redundant coalition evalu-
ations eliminated by quotient projection, as a function of the
sampler’s size distribution pk and the FD-induced collapse
counts NC(k).
The decomposition admits a combinatorial interpretation:
for each C ∈CΣ, NC(k) counts the number of size-k coali-
tions whose closure generates C (i.e., size-k generators of C),
and q(C) aggregates these counts weighted by the sampler’s
size distribution pk. The collapse counts NC(k) depend on
the FD structure of ΣFD; representative cases are given in
Appendix H.2. Intuitively, FDs with small left-hand sides in-
duce equivalence classes with small rank r(C), so that many
coalitions collapse to the same class, yielding large NC(k)
at small sizes. Runtime reduction therefore emerges from the
interaction between the estimator’s size distribution and the
FD-induced collapse structure:


• Kernel SHAP places larger probability mass on extreme
(small and large) coalition sizes. Since FDs in practice
tend to have small left-hand sides, the resulting classes have
small r(C) and large NC(k) for small k, precisely the sizes
Kernel SHAP oversamples. The runtime improvement is
therefore amplified when ΣFD contains many low-arity
dependencies.
• Monte Carlo and Leverage SHAP distribute probability
more uniformly across coalition sizes and do not strongly
favor any particular k. The runtime improvement depends
mainly on the overall magnitude of the collapse counts
NC(k) across all sizes; that is, on how many coalitions
share the same closure.
I
Details of datasets
For each dataset, we summarize the identifiers that are
dropped (used in provenance-aware mode), together with a
high-level dataset overview in Table 4. For the runtime re-
quired to extract schema-, query-, and data-level relational
constraints, including the refinement step, over the entire
dataset (Textract), all datasets complete within 12 seconds ex-
cept for SpeedDating and MovieLens 20M. In both cases, the
cost is dominated by data-driven FD extraction—due to the
large number of features (|F|) in SpeedDating and the large
number of data points in MovieLens 20M—taking 482.687s
and 98.922s, respectively. Table 5 lists the correspond-
ing machine learning benchmark sources (OpenML (Van-
schoren et al. 2014), OpenML-CC18 (Bischl et al. 2021),
TabZilla (McElfresh et al. 2023), and TabRed (Rubachev
et al. 2025)). Entity-relationship diagrams (ERDs) with de-
tailed queries and the full set of extracted relational con-
straints are provided in our supplementary material. As ex-
pected, query execution over the normalized schema pre-
serves the full content of the original dataset.
Amazon employee access. This dataset addresses a clas-
sification task that predicts whether access to a resource is
approved or denied (ACTION) based on role of employees
and resource-related information. Since the original data is
provided as a single flattened table, role (job) types identi-
fied by ROLE_CODE are separated into a Role table, while
employee’s resource access request instances are stored in
an Employee table. Each instance is assigned an artifi-
cial identifier row_id to enable row-level traceability to the
original data.
Churn. This dataset targets a binary classification task that
predicts customer churn from customer account attributes
and call usage statistics. We apply a normalization to cre-
ate Customer, Usage, and Period tables: Customer
stores customer-level profile information, Period enumer-
ates call categories (DAY, EVE, NIGHT, INTL), and Usage
stores per-customer and per-period call usage statistics. In
the final flattened table, period-specific usage records are
pivoted into distinct feature columns for each customer (e.g.,
total_day_minutes, total_eve_calls, total_night_charge), re-
flecting the underlying normalized structure and the func-
tional dependencies it induces.
Churn Modelling. This dataset addresses a binary classi-
fication task that predicts whether a bank customer leaves
the bank (Exited) from customer attributes. The pro-
vided flattened table includes two identifier-like columns,
RowNumber and CustomerId, which are typically re-
moved in the downstream machine learning task; however,
we use them to normalize the data into Customer and
Profile tables. The Customer table represents customer
entities and stores basic personal information, while the
Profile table represents one record per row identified by
RowNumber, linked to Customer through CustomerId,
and stores customer financial information.
German Credit (credit-g). This dataset is designed for
a binary classification task that predicts whether an ap-
plicant has a good or bad credit risk based on demo-
graphic and financial attributes. We apply a semantic nor-
malization that separates applicant-level attributes into the
Applicant table and credit application–specific attributes
into the Application table. Each record is assigned a syn-
thetic identifier application_id, and Application
references Applicant through a one-to-one relationship.
SpeedDating. This dataset is designed for a binary clas-
sification task that predicts whether two participants ulti-
mately select each other (whether a match occurs), based on
participant profile (survey) information and mutual evalua-
tion data collected from experimental speed dating events.
Although the original data is provided as a single flattened
table, the semantics naturally separate participant-level at-
tributes from encounter-level attributes. Accordingly, we nor-
malize the data into three tables: Person, Interaction,
and BucketRule. Table Person stores attributes that
are fixed for a participant (e.g., preference criteria) Table
Interaction stores encounter-level attributes observed
when two participants meet (e.g., ratings of the partner)
Since the column wave denotes an independent experi-
mental session, participants can interact only with others
within the same wave. Therefore, all identifiers and joins
are performed within wave. The relational structure of this
dataset inherently induces a self-join on the Person ta-
ble, since each interaction links two persons, identified by
self_id and partner_id, within the same entity. Since
the dataset contains both continuous variables and their dis-
cretized counterparts (d_*), we construct a BucketRule
table that records the mapping from each base feature to its
bucket label. At the query-level, we derive composite fea-
tures such as age difference and same-race indicators, which
also induce FDs. Participant–partner identities are recovered
by enforcing reciprocal consistency within each wave. Rows
without a unique match are removed, yielding 8,364 rows
from the original 8,378, with each interaction represented by
two directed rows.
TPC-H. We define a binary classification task at the sup-
plier level that predicts whether a supplier is high risk based
on operational performance signals derived from transac-
tional data. A final table used for ML task contains per-
supplier aggregates summarizing transaction volume, fi-
nancial performance, delivery behavior, and return behav-
ior, together with supplier account balance and geographic
attributes (nation and region). We derive a binary label
supplier_risk by thresholding the late delivery rate and
return rate at their 75th percentiles; a supplier is labeled pos-


itive if either rate exceeds its threshold.
UW-CSE. We study a multi-class classification problem
that predicts a students program phase (inPhase), a com-
monly studied task on the UW-CSE dataset, using infor-
mation about advising and course enrollment. We derive a
student-centric table in which each row summarizes a stu-
dents academic context via aggregated statistics, such as the
number of advisors and counts of courses at different lev-
els, along with the students years in program. The identifier
p_id is kept only to index instances and is excluded from the
feature set. The relational design further gives rise to a self-
join on person, since the advisedBy relation associates
one person with another person in different roles (student or
professor).
MovieLens 20M. This dataset targets a binary classifica-
tion task that predicts whether a user gives a movie a high
rating. Since the task is defined over user-movie pairs, the
final table retains both userId and movieId, and includes
movie attributes, genre identifiers, and a representative tag
feature. The specific machine learning task and query are
defined by the authors.
Synthetic. This is a synthetic relational dataset con-
structed by the authors for a binary classification task that
predicts loan approval as an extension of Example 1. It
consists of three tables: Applicants, Transactions,
and Items, and includes FD: age →life_stage as
well as conditional domain constraints between region
and currency, designed to evaluate how RelShap incor-
porates conditional domain knowledge and denial constraints
(gender). The final learning table is generated by a query
with transaction-level aggregation (e.g., transaction count
and total quantity) and top item selection; these operations
induce FDs, and thus identifiers a_id (applicant) and t_id
(transaction) are dropped.
J
Experiments
J.1
Detailed experimental setups
Hardware and reproducibility. All experiments ran on a
machine with an Intel Xeon Platinum 8592+ CPU (128 cores,
512 GB RAM) and an NVIDIA A100 GPU (80 GB VRAM)
for deep learning models. Implementation details for repro-
ducibility are in our code repository. Table 6 lists the hy-
perparameter settings for training predictive models; since
Shapley values are post-hoc and model-agnostic, we do not
optimize predictive performance. For all experiments, we
use three random seeds: 2026, 2027, and 2028. Software ver-
sions, environment configuration, and full implementation
details for reproducibility are available in our code reposi-
tory. Availability and summary of relational constraints per
dataset are summarized in Tables 7 and 8.
Convergence protocol. For each dataset we identify a uni-
fied convergence budget Mconv at which Shapley estimates
stabilize, using Top-3 Jaccard distance as the convergence
criterion, after verifying qualitatively similar convergence
across estimators (Covert et al. 2020; Yuan et al. 2022).
J.2
Detailed experimental results
Semantic effects
Table 9 summarizes explanation differ-
ences and their deviations from the randomized null baseline
across datasets, predictive models, estimators, and compari-
son modes. Table 10 further provides the per-dataset break-
down for the comparison modes yielding the largest devia-
tions from the null baseline.
Figures 5 and 6 illustrate two complementary regimes.
UW-CSE is a small database (DB) dataset (|F|=7) where
we can afford full coalition enumeration (Mconv = 2|F |−1),
providing an exact comparison; German Credit is a medium-
scale ML dataset (|F|=20) with sampled coalitions. In both
cases, several RelShap configurations produce distances
that exceed the shaded null-baseline region, indicating shifts
beyond what random perturbation can explain.
Note that distances do not necessarily increase as more
constraint types are added: each configuration changes which
background points are admissible, and the resulting rank-
ings can move in any direction relative to the default. On
UW-CSE, for instance, all features are functionally deter-
mined by the dropped identifier p_id, so provenance-aware
mode collapses the background to near-deterministic com-
pletions. In this setting, the resulting explanation differences
from the default sampler, which draws from the small train-
ing set (|Dtrain| = 112), remain at or below the null base-
line. In contrast, on TPC-H, suppkey induces richer cross-
table structure over a larger pool (|Dtrain| = 8,000), and
provenance-aware mode produces consistently large positive
∆values (Appendix Table 11). The complementary metric
pairing—1−RBO on UW-CSE and Top-3 Jaccard on Ger-
man Credit—is in Appendix Figures 7 and 8.
Computational effects
We measure the relative reduction
in runtime per explanation sample as (Tref −Ttarget)/Tref ×
100 (%), where Tref denotes the runtime of the reference
method (Default or RelShap (BG)) and Ttarget denotes that of
RelShap (BG/Q). Figure 14 presents runtime reduction ver-
sus the empirical speedup factor. Figure 7 shows 1 −RBO
results on the UW-CSE dataset, and Figure 8 shows Top-3
Jaccard distance on the German Credit dataset, complement-
ing the main text with the opposite pairing. Figure 9 shows
pairwise runtime comparisons across all datasets, models,
and comparison modes. Overall, runtime reduction is ob-
served in a large fraction of cases, with Monte Carlo and
Leverage SHAP showing particularly strong gains, where re-
duction occurs in 91.55% and 84.72% of cases, respectively,
while Kernel SHAP shows a lower rate of 43.06%. This
pattern indicates that the benefit of quotient space coalition
projection in RelShap is estimator-dependent.
Table 15 summarizes the frequency of runtime reduction
across datasets. The runtime reduction is consistently ob-
served for Monte Carlo and Leverage SHAP across most
datasets, often exceeding 90%. In contrast, Kernel SHAP
shows higher variability, with little to no reduction on some
datasets (e.g., German Credit and UW-CSE) but strong im-
provements on others (e.g., SpeedDating and TPC-H). Build-
ing on the analysis in Section 3.3, we observe that, in general,
runtime reduction becomes more pronounced as the total
number of FDs increases. In particular, for Kernel SHAP,


Table 4: ML: flattened datasets with predefined machine learning tasks (relational structure is normalized by the authors).
DB: relational schemas are given and machine learning tasks are defined by the authors via queries. |F|: # of input features
excluding the target. Train/test splits: scikit-learn’s train_test_split with an 8:2 ratio. Due to memory constraints, for
model training, we used 2.5% of the MovieLens 20M training sets. For background data selection, we used 400,000 samples
for MovieLens 20M, and 2,000 for SpeedDating. Mconv, B: coalition budget and the chosen background size for convergence,
Textract: runtime (in seconds) taken to extract relational constraints over the entire dataset.
Type
Dataset
|F|
# data points
# train
# test
Mconv
B
Textract(sec)
ML
Amazon
9
32,769
26,215
6,554
27
26,215
7.139
Churn
20
5,000
4,000
1,000
29
4,000
6.961
Churn Modelling
11
10,000
8,000
2,000
25
8,000
6.028
German Credit
20
1,000
800
200
28
800
6.513
SpeedDating
121
8,364
6,691
1,673
29
2,000
482.687
DB
TPC-H
22
10,000
8,000
2,000
28
8,000
11.533
UW-CSE
7
140
112
28
26
112
6.712
MovieLens 20M
5
20,000,264
1,600,211
400,053
23
10,000
98.922
Synthetic
11
3,000
2,400
600
26
2,400
7.107
Table 5: ML benchmark inclusion for the tabular ML datasets used in our experiments.
Dataset
OpenML ID
OpenML-CC18
TabZilla
TabRed
Amazon Employee Access
43900
✓
✓
Churn
40701
✓
Churn Modeling
N/A
✓
German Credit
31
✓
✓
✓
SpeedDating
40536
✓
✓
Kernel
MC
Leverage
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
Top-3 Jaccard distance
BG
Kernel
MC
Leverage
BG + DCs
Kernel
MC
Leverage
BG + Prov, Strict
Kernel
MC
Leverage
BG + Prov, Relaxed
Kernel
MC
Leverage
All
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
XGBoost
MLP-PLR
Null baseline range [0.298, 0.483]
Figure 5: Top-3 Jaccard distance between default estimators and RelShap configurations on UW-CSE dataset. Values above the
shaded region indicate that RelShap induces larger changes than expected under the randomized null baseline.
roughly the benefit tends to emerge only when there is a suf-
ficiently large number of FDs with |LHS| = 1 (as shown in
Table 8), which is more evident for Kernel SHAP than for
the other two estimators.
Figure 10 provides a more detailed view of the actual
runtime per test sample across datasets. Table 12 summarizes
the percentage of cases exhibiting runtime reduction across
estimators and models. Monte Carlo consistently shows the
highest reduction rates (95.24% and 85.19%), followed by
Leverage SHAP, while Kernel SHAP exhibits more moderate
gains. These results are expected as described in Section 3.3.
Across models, the variation is relatively small compared
to differences across estimators, although Random Forest
and XGBoost exhibit slightly higher reduction rates. This
pattern indicates that the benefit of quotient space coalition
projection in RelShap is estimator-dependent.
Tables 13 and 14 provide a per-mode breakdown. Several
patterns emerge. First, BG alone already reduces runtime for
Monte Carlo on several datasets (e.g., Amazon drops from
16.642 to 0.009 sec per sample, and TPC-H from 2.383 to
0.366). Adding quotient projection (BG/Q) yields further
gains, particularly for Kernel SHAP on datasets with rich
FD structure: on TPC-H, Kernel SHAP drops from 6.527
(Default) to 1.777 (BG/Q), and on Churn from 24.425 to
12.094. Second, the benefit is estimator-dependent: Monte
Carlo and Leverage SHAP show consistent reductions across
datasets, while Kernel SHAP improves primarily on datasets
with many FDs having |LHS|=1 (Table 8). On datasets
with predominantly |LHS|=2 FDs (e.g., German Credit),
Kernel SHAP shows little or no improvement, and BG/Q


Table 6: Hyperparameter settings for each model.
Model
Hyperparameter space
Logistic
Regression
regularization parameter ∈[10−4, 102]
Random
Forest
number of trees ∈{300, 500, 800}
maximum tree depth ∈{None, 6, 10, 16}
minimum samples per leaf ∈{1, 2, 5}
feature subsampling
∈{sqrt, log2, None}
XGBoost
number of trees ∈{300, 500, 800}
maximum tree depth ∈{3, 4, 6, 8}
learning rate ∈{0.03, 0.05, 0.1}
row/feature subsampling
∈{0.7, 0.8, 1.0}
minimum child weight ∈{1, 3, 5}
L2 regularization strength
∈{0.5, 1.0, 2.0}
MLP-PLR
embedding dimension ∈{12, 24, 32}
# of frequencies ∈{8, 16, 32}
frequency scale ∈[0.01, 0.2]
hidden layer sizes
∈{(128), (256), (256, 128), (512, 256)}
dropout rate ∈{0.0, 0.1, 0.2}
learning rate ∈{3×10−4, 10−3, 3×10−3}
weight decay ∈{0, 10−5, 10−4, 10−3}
Kernel
MC
Leverage
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
BG
Kernel
MC
Leverage
BG + Prov, Strict
Kernel
MC
Leverage
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
BG + Prov, Relaxed
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
XGBoost
Null baseline range:
  [0.082, 0.142]
 
 
MLP-PLR
 
1 - RBO
Figure 6: 1−RBO between default estimators and RelShap
configurations on German Credit. Values above the shaded
region exceed the randomized null baseline. This dataset has
no domain or denial constraints, so those modes are omitted.
can even incur slight overhead from the canonicalization
step without sufficient deduplication to compensate. Third,
provenance-aware modes (BG/Q + Prov) exhibit dataset-
dependent behavior: on TPC-H, Monte Carlo benefits sub-
stantially (0.142 sec/sample under Prov, Strict vs. 0.192 un-
der BG/Q), while on other datasets the additional provenance
lookups can offset the gains from deduplication. The full-
Table 7: RelShap configuration options. Each option can be
combined with any dataset, model, and coalition estimator.
Availability depends on the constraint types present in the
dataset (Table 8). Options above the mid-rule change the
explanation; the option below it affects only running time.
Option
Description
BG
Background data filtered to satisfy ΣFD
(Def. 1).
DCs
Domain and denial constraints (Σdom ∪
Σden) enforced during background filter-
ing.
Prov, Strict
Identifier-induced FDs applied when the
dropped identifier is uniquely determined
from the coalition.
Prov, Relaxed
Identifier-induced FDs applied when at-
tribute values are constant across candi-
date identifiers (subsumes Strict).
Quotient (Q)
Coalitions mapped to FD-closed canoni-
cal form; Σ-equivalent coalitions dedupli-
cated. Performance optimization, Shap-
ley values unchanged (Prop. 1).
Table 8: Summary of relational constraints per dataset. |F|:
number of features. # FD: total functional dependencies
(breakdown (|LHS|=1/2)). # DCs: domain and denial con-
straints (lower/upper bounds counted separately). # Prov:
FDs associated with provenance-aware mode.
Dataset
|F|
# FD
# DCs
# Prov
Amazon
9
4 (4/0)
0
9
Churn
20
29 (25/4)
0
20
Churn Modelling
11
45 (3/42)
0
24
German Credit
20
6 (0/6)
0
20
SpeedDating
121
58 (55/3)
209
231
TPC-H
22
426 (106/320)
5
22
UW-CSE
7
6 (6/0)
6
7
MovieLens 20M
5
3 (3/0)
0
0
Synthetic
11
19 (2/17)
9
29
featured mode (BG/Q + Prov, Relaxed + DCs), available on
datasets with all constraint types, shows competitive run-
times: on TPC-H, Monte Carlo achieves 0.091 sec/sample,
a 26× reduction over Default. Across models, variation is
small compared to differences across estimators, confirming
that the runtime benefit is primarily estimator-driven. It is
noteworthy that since DCs may introduce additional lookup
costs and filtering costs, DC and All modes have a probability
of slowing down the computations, even with or without Q
mode. Therefore, quotient mode provides runtime benefits,
but this does not always happen. Q can reduce runtime with
rich FD structures desirable estimators; otherwise, overhead
may dominate.
Scalability
Figure 11 shows running time per sample as
the number of background data points (Churn) and coalitions
(TPC-H) increase. On Churn (Figure 11a), all three methods


(a) By dataset
Dataset
Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
Amazon
0.106 ± 0.225
0.046 ± 0.100
-0.294 ± 0.225
-0.129 ± 0.100
Churn
0.446 ± 0.283
0.171 ± 0.109
0.044 ± 0.283
0.059 ± 0.109
Churn Modelling
0.123 ± 0.256
0.048 ± 0.104
-0.277 ± 0.256
-0.109 ± 0.104
German Credit
0.520 ± 0.288
0.194 ± 0.116
0.118 ± 0.288
0.082 ± 0.116
SpeedDating
0.804 ± 0.189
0.245 ± 0.123
0.403 ± 0.189
0.213 ± 0.123
TPC-H
0.612 ± 0.365
0.245 ± 0.142
0.212 ± 0.365
0.140 ± 0.142
UW-CSE
0.263 ± 0.243
0.121 ± 0.113
-0.129 ± 0.243
-0.072 ± 0.113
MovieLens 20M
0.479 ± 0.178
0.265 ± 0.094
0.129 ± 0.178
0.050 ± 0.094
Synthetic
0.500 ± 0.229
0.222 ± 0.103
0.099 ± 0.229
0.065 ± 0.103
(b) By predictive model
Model
Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
Logistic Regression
0.425 ± 0.361
0.168 ± 0.145
0.028 ± 0.361
0.033 ± 0.167
Random Forest
0.445 ± 0.331
0.173 ± 0.135
0.048 ± 0.331
0.039 ± 0.156
XGBoost
0.436 ± 0.337
0.173 ± 0.135
0.039 ± 0.336
0.039 ± 0.158
MLP-PLR
0.434 ± 0.335
0.170 ± 0.134
0.037 ± 0.335
0.035 ± 0.156
(c) By estimator
Estimator
Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
Kernel SHAP
0.301 ± 0.283
0.101 ± 0.097
-0.096 ± 0.282
-0.033 ± 0.124
Leverage SHAP
0.518 ± 0.383
0.214 ± 0.155
0.121 ± 0.383
0.079 ± 0.178
MC
0.488 ± 0.308
0.199 ± 0.124
0.090 ± 0.309
0.065 ± 0.148
(d) By comparison mode (Default vs. Mode)
Mode
Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
BG
0.452 ± 0.337
0.190 ± 0.146
0.057 ± 0.337
0.050 ± 0.156
BG + DCs
0.566 ± 0.324
0.216 ± 0.128
0.168 ± 0.322
0.094 ± 0.151
BG + Prov, Strict
0.377 ± 0.356
0.142 ± 0.139
-0.023 ± 0.355
0.011 ± 0.171
BG + Prov, Relaxed
0.415 ± 0.342
0.155 ± 0.130
0.015 ± 0.342
0.024 ± 0.158
All
0.430 ± 0.321
0.172 ± 0.128
0.036 ± 0.322
0.032 ± 0.150
Table 9: Summary of explanation differences (Top-3 Jaccard, 1 −RBO) and deviations from the null baseline (∆), aggregated
by dataset, predictive model, estimator, and comparison mode.
Kernel
MC
Leverage
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
1 - RBO
BG
Kernel
MC
Leverage
BG + DCs
Kernel
MC
Leverage
BG + Prov, Strict
Kernel
MC
Leverage
BG + Prov, Relaxed
Kernel
MC
Leverage
All
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
XGBoost
MLP-PLR
Null baseline range [0.149, 0.235]
Figure 7: 1−RBO between default estimators and RelShap configurations on UW-CSE dataset. Values above the shaded region
indicate that RelShap induces larger changes than expected under the randomized null baseline.
grow with background size, but the gap between Default
and BG/Q widens as B increases: for Kernel SHAP, BG/Q
remains roughly flat while Default grows super-linearly; for
Monte Carlo, BG alone already provides a large reduction
that BG/Q maintains; for Leverage SHAP, the separation is
moderate but consistent.
On TPC-H (Figure 11d), runtime grows with the coalition
budget M for all methods, but BG/Q maintains a substantial


(a) Default vs. BG
Dataset
Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
Amazon
0.265 ± 0.381
0.119 ± 0.171
−0.136 ± 0.381
−0.056 ± 0.171
Churn
0.553 ± 0.197
0.214 ± 0.078
0.151 ± 0.197
0.102 ± 0.078
Churn Modelling
0.297 ± 0.427
0.125 ± 0.180
−0.104 ± 0.427
−0.033 ± 0.180
German Credit
0.391 ± 0.417
0.161 ± 0.177
−0.011 ± 0.417
0.049 ± 0.177
SpeedDating
0.644 ± 0.258
0.190 ± 0.135
0.243 ± 0.258
0.158 ± 0.135
TPC-H
0.629 ± 0.296
0.250 ± 0.111
0.229 ± 0.296
0.144 ± 0.111
UW-CSE
0.335 ± 0.240
0.162 ± 0.117
−0.057 ± 0.240
−0.031 ± 0.117
MovieLens 20M
0.479 ± 0.179
0.265 ± 0.095
0.129 ± 0.179
0.050 ± 0.095
Synthetic
0.474 ± 0.320
0.222 ± 0.147
0.073 ± 0.320
0.065 ± 0.147
(b) Default vs. BG + DCs
Dataset
Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
SpeedDating
0.845 ± 0.139
0.234 ± 0.114
0.444 ± 0.139
0.202 ± 0.114
TPC-H
0.593 ± 0.308
0.238 ± 0.113
0.192 ± 0.308
0.133 ± 0.113
UW-CSE
0.335 ± 0.240
0.162 ± 0.117
−0.057 ± 0.240
−0.031 ± 0.117
Synthetic
0.494 ± 0.338
0.230 ± 0.152
0.093 ± 0.338
0.072 ± 0.152
(c) Default vs. All
Dataset
Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
SpeedDating
0.883 ± 0.122
0.274 ± 0.118
0.482 ± 0.122
0.242 ± 0.118
TPC-H
0.622 ± 0.447
0.247 ± 0.178
0.222 ± 0.447
0.142 ± 0.178
UW-CSE
0.372 ± 0.270
0.165 ± 0.123
−0.020 ± 0.270
−0.028 ± 0.123
Synthetic
0.471 ± 0.185
0.205 ± 0.074
0.070 ± 0.185
0.047 ± 0.074
Table 10: Dataset-wise explanation differences for Default vs. BG, Default vs. BG + DCs, and Default vs. All. We report
per-dataset results for the two modes with the largest ∆Jaccard and ∆RBO. Values are mean ± standard deviation; results for
BG + DCs and All are shown only when applicable.
gap below Default across the full range for Kernel SHAP and
Monte Carlo. For Leverage SHAP, the three curves are closer
together, reflecting the smaller number of collapsible coali-
tions under this estimator’s sampling distribution. The com-
plementary pairing in the Appendix confirms these patterns:
TPC-H vs. background data (Appendix Figure 11b) shows
the same widening gap, with BG/Q providing the largest
separation for Kernel SHAP and MC; Churn vs. coalitions
(Appendix Figure 11c) shows all three curves growing to-
gether but with BG/Q consistently below Default, and the
gap widening at larger coalition budgets. Overall, the reduc-
tion from BG/Q grows with problem size across both axes,
indicating that RelShap becomes more effective with larger
data and coalition budgets.
Additional model–dataset pairs and richer constraint set-
tings exhibit the same overall scaling behavior, although the
magnitude of the gain depends on the estimator and the avail-
able coalition redundancy. On MovieLens 20M dataset with
MLP-PLR (Figure 12a), BG/Q increasingly separates from
Default as the background size grows, with particularly large
reductions for Monte Carlo and Leverage SHAP and a smaller
but clear reduction for Kernel SHAP. On SpeedDating dataset
with logistic regression (Figure 12b), all configurations grow
similarly with the coalition budget, although BG/Q remains
consistently below Default at larger M. Churn Modelling
dataset with XGBoost (Figure 13) further shows that richer
provenance settings preserve the same scaling trends across
both axes: running times increase with background size and
coalition budget. This suggests that enriching the relational
semantics does not fundamentally alter the scalability pro-
file: runtime is driven primarily by the estimator, evaluation
budget, and the quotient mode, allowing richer constraint-
aware explanations to be incorporated without introducing a
qualitatively different scaling behavior.
Alignment with combinatorial analysis
We measure this
using the empirical counterpart of RM in Thm. 1, ˆRMconv =
1−1/ ˆSMconv where ˆSMconv =
1
nexplain
P
nexplain
1
B
PB
b=1
Mconv
Kquot
b
and Kquot
b
is the number of distinct equivalence classes after
quotient mode. Figure 14 shows an alignment of real runtime
reduction and our combinatorial analysis in Thm. 1. This
confirms that our analysis reliably predicts when reduction
will occur, although its exact magnitude remains contingent
on the dataset and sampling strategy.
Detailed analysis on provenance-aware mode
TPC-H.
Schema: As the primary key of the Supplier table,
suppkey is referenced by Lineitem and Partsupp


(a) Default vs. BG + Prov
Dataset
Est. Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
TPC-H
Ker 0.922 / 0.914 0.376 / 0.376 0.522 / 0.514
0.271 / 0.271
MC 0.954 / 0.959 0.388 / 0.376 0.553 / 0.558
0.283 / 0.270
Lev 0.000 / 0.000 0.000 / 0.000 -0.401 / -0.401 -0.105 / -0.105
UW-CSE
Ker 0.018 / 0.202 0.004 / 0.054 -0.374 / -0.190 -0.190 / -0.139
MC 0.012 / 0.006 0.004 / 0.048 -0.380 / -0.386 -0.189 / -0.145
Lev 0.021 / 0.382 0.029 / 0.153 -0.371 / -0.010 -0.164 / -0.040
(b) BG vs. BG + Prov
Dataset
Est. Top-3 Jaccard
1 −RBO
∆Jaccard
∆RBO
TPC-H
Ker 0.914 / 0.924 0.356 / 0.361 0.513 / 0.523
0.250 / 0.255
Lev 0.965 / 0.965 0.369 / 0.369 0.565 / 0.565
0.263 / 0.263
MC 0.881 / 0.883 0.316 / 0.310 0.480 / 0.482
0.211 / 0.205
UW-CSE
Ker. 0.018 / 0.202 0.004 / 0.054 -0.374 / -0.190 -0.190 / -0.139
Lev 0.504 / 0.326 0.233 / 0.223 0.112 / -0.066 0.040 / 0.030
MC 0.504 / 0.500 0.224 / 0.242 0.112 / 0.108
0.031 / 0.049
Table 11: Explanation differences for provenance-aware comparisons on TPC-H and UW-CSE with XGBoost. Each entry is
reported as Strict / Relaxed mode. Est. denotes Estimator and Ker, MC, and Lev denote Kernel SHAP, Monte Carlo, and Leverage
SHAP, respectively.
Kernel
MC
Leverage
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.00
BG
Kernel
MC
Leverage
BG + Prov, Strict
Kernel
MC
Leverage
0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.00
BG + Prov, Relaxed
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
XGBoost
Null baseline range:
  [0.302, 0.504]
 
 
MLP-PLR
 
Top-3 Jaccard distance
Figure 8: Top-3 Jaccard distance between default estimators
and RelShap configurations on German Credit dataset. Val-
ues above the shaded region indicate that RelShap induces
larger changes than expected under the randomized null base-
line. Note that German Credit dataset does not contain any
domain or denial constraints and therefore the results are not
provided.
tables, and further connected to Orders through join
paths, inducing supplier-level FDs across related records.
Query: Grouping on suppkey produces one tuple per sup-
plier with aggregate statistics (e.g., counts, sums, and aver-
ages), making suppkey functionally determine all features.
suppkey is removed in the final ML table and utilized in the
provenance-aware mode. UW-CSE. Schema: The identifier
p_id in the Person table propagates through relational
links such as AdvisedBy and TaughtBy, capturing FDs
Table 12: Percentage of cases with runtime reduction across
estimators and models.
Estimator / Model
Default vs. BG/Q
BG vs. BG/Q
Kernel SHAP
47.22%
42.59%
Monte Carlo
95.24%
85.19%
Leverage SHAP
81.48%
84.26%
Logistic Regression
69.14%
64.20%
Random Forest
80.25%
80.25%
XGBoost
85.19%
75.31%
MLP-PLR
62.82%
62.96%
at the student level. Query: Aggregating over p_id yields
one tuple per student with relational statistics (e.g., advisor
counts and course-level features), so all features are func-
tionally determined by p_id. p_id is finally removed in
the ML table and used in the provenance-aware mode.
J.3
Controlled validation of RelShap
Validation under synthetic settings
Expanding on Sec-
tion 4.1, we consider two additional settings over four
features—age, life_stage, empl, and total_amt.
The first enforces only the FD age →life_stage,
whereas the second additionally incorporates the provenance
constraints from Example 1. Unlike Section 4.1, attribution
ordering between a particular feature pair is no longer ex-
pected to hold in isolation when additional features are intro-
duced, as their Shapley values now also depend on such newly
included features. We therefore examine how the overall at-
tribution vector and feature ranking change as δ increases
(0 to 10 in increments of 0.5, averaged across three random
seeds). Figures 15 and 16 report the L1 distance and ranking
changes as the strength of invalid perturbations increases.


0
5
10
15
20
25
45
65
85
Target runtime (sec/sample)
0
5
10
15
20
25
45
65
85
Reference runtime (sec/sample)
Kernel SHAP (43.06% improved)
0
2
4
6
8
10
20
30
Target runtime (sec/sample)
0
2
4
6
8
10
20
30
Monte Carlo (91.55% improved)
0
2
4
6
8
16
Target runtime (sec/sample)
0
2
4
6
8
16
Leverage SHAP (84.72% improved)
Dataset
Model
Comparison
Amazon
Churn
Churn Modelling
German Credit
SpeedDating
TPC-H
UW-CSE
MovieLens 20M
Synthetic
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
XGBoost
MLP-PLR
Default vs. RelShap (BG + Q)
RelShap (BG) vs. RelShap (BG + Q)
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure 9: Runtime comparison between the reference method and RelShap (BG/Quotient). Each point corresponds to a
dataset–model–configuration pair. Points above the diagonal indicate runtime reduction.
Amazon
Churn
Churn Modelling
German Credit
MovieLens 20M
SpeedDating
Synthetic
TPC-H
UW-CSE
0
20
40
60
Runtime (sec/sample)
Default
BG
BG/Q
(a) Kernel SHAP.
Amazon
Churn
Churn Modelling
German Credit
MovieLens 20M
SpeedDating
Synthetic
TPC-H
UW-CSE
0
5
10
15
Runtime (sec/sample)
(b) Monte Carlo.
Amazon
Churn
Churn Modelling
German Credit
MovieLens 20M
SpeedDating
Synthetic
TPC-H
UW-CSE
0
2
4
6
8
Runtime (sec/sample)
(c) Leverage SHAP.
Figure 10: Average running time (sec/sample) across datasets under XGBoost; y-axis uses a square root scaling.
Under the FD-only setting, RelShap remains unchanged
across all metrics, while all baselines exhibit increasing at-
tribution and ranking shifts. With provenance constraints,
RelShap using both FDs and provenance again remains in-
variant, followed by FD-only RelShap as the most stable
alternative. These results show that excluding relationally
impossible states corrects the internal Shapley computation
and makes RelShap insensitive to relationally invalid per-
turbations that are never observed during training or testing.
Validation with real datasets
Figures 17 and 18 vali-
date the same behavior on two representative real datasets:
German Credit, a standard ML dataset with FDs without
provenance information, and UW-CSE, a relational database
dataset with both FDs and provenance constraints (Table 8).
For both datasets, the base predictive model is XGBoost
with 0.5 ≤r(·) < 1.0. On German Credit, all baselines ex-
hibit increasing attribution and ranking changes as δ grows,
whereas FD-only RelShap remains unchanged. On UW-
CSE, in FD-only setting, RelShap is the only method that
remains stable even with increasing δ. In FD + Prov setup,
only RelShap incorporating both FDs and provenance con-
straint remains unchanged. These results show that sensitiv-
ity to relationally invalid perturbations is eliminated when
the corresponding relational structure is incorporated into
Shapley computation.
J.4
Relational invalidity in Shapley computation
Violation density reports the total number of violations nor-
malized by the number of coalition–constraint pairs. Ta-
bles 16 and 17 show that relational invalidity is widespread
across datasets and estimators, with provenance constraints
substantially increasing violation prevalence while affecting
density more moderately; the lower normalized density un-
der BG + DCs mainly reflects the larger number of coalition–
constraint pairs rather than fewer violations. Leverage SHAP
generally yields the highest prevalence and density, whereas
MC tends to be the lowest. Averaged across datasets, Ta-
bles 18 and 19 confirm that these estimator-level differences
are smaller than the increases induced by richer constraints.


Table 13: Running time (sec/sample) under XGBoost for datasets without denial constraints (mean over three seeds). These
datasets do not admit the full-featured configuration (BG/Q + Prov, Relaxed + DCs); see Table 14 for datasets with DCs. When
provenance is active, quotient projection deduplicates using both global and provenance-induced FDs; however, provenance
lookups add their own overhead, so BG/Q + Prov is not guaranteed to be faster than BG/Q alone. Dashes (-) indicate inapplicable
configurations (Table 8). See Appendix Figure 10 for a visual comparison. Here, Ker, MC, and Lev denote Kernel SHAP, Monte
Carlo, and Leverage SHAP, respectively. Prov, St/Rel denotes Prov, Strict/Relaxed mode.
Amazon
Churn
Churn Modelling
German Credit
MovieLens 20M
Mode
Ker
MC
Lev
Ker
MC
Lev
Ker
MC
Lev
Ker
MC
Lev
Ker
MC
Lev
Default
60.389 16.642 8.612 24.425 7.026 8.084 1.523 0.493 0.241 0.793 0.590 0.321 1.362 0.387 0.202
BG
51.599
0.009
7.584 19.977 3.181 3.616 1.346 0.008 0.369 0.759 0.554 0.327 1.309 0.157 0.264
BG/Q
56.624
0.009
7.362 12.094 2.494 2.216 1.576 0.006 0.305 1.550 0.485 0.218 1.317 0.082 0.117
BG + Prov, Strict
52.411
0.005
7.832 22.490 0.865 5.015 1.263 0.004 0.288 0.742 0.220 0.255
-
-
-
BG/Q + Prov, Strict
52.725 16.360 8.739 17.261 0.782 7.146 1.292 0.498 0.245 0.913 0.260 0.306
-
-
-
BG + Prov, Relaxed
55.019
0.006
6.715 21.232 0.706 6.182 1.286 0.004 0.290 0.714 0.114 0.314
-
-
-
BG/Q + Prov, Relaxed 56.626 16.160 7.703 20.260 0.797 5.771 1.626 0.470 0.262 0.973 0.157 0.342
-
-
-
Table 14: Running time (sec/sample) under XGBoost for datasets with denial constraints (mean over three seeds). The last row
shows the full-featured RelShap configuration.
SpeedDating
TPC-H
UW-CSE
Synthetic
Mode
Ker
MC
Lev
Ker
MC
Lev
Ker
MC
Lev
Ker
MC
Lev
Default
45.985
12.817
7.447
6.527 2.383 1.244 0.062 0.119 0.084 0.505 0.212 0.119
BG
45.408
11.038
7.098
6.464 0.366 1.094 0.054 0.115 0.078 0.558 0.160 0.123
BG/Q
37.227
10.068
5.785
1.777 0.192 1.138 0.271 0.054 0.048 0.622 0.106 0.082
BG + DCs
225.200 64.119 20.932 9.132 0.651 2.658 0.034 0.019 0.015 2.248 0.685 0.628
BG/Q + DCs
244.800 73.635 22.820 2.988 0.377 2.364 0.064 0.011 0.012 2.587 0.553 0.333
BG + Prov, Strict
38.582
0.683
7.530
7.478 0.315 2.001 0.007 0.012 0.010 0.519 0.063 0.109
BG/Q + Prov, Strict
36.976
1.006
9.491
6.167 0.142 1.725 0.066 0.108 0.076 0.483 0.077 0.124
BG + Prov, Relaxed
42.115
0.731
10.293 6.660 0.171 1.971 0.008 0.010 0.012 0.469 0.073 0.125
BG/Q + Prov, Relaxed
40.604
0.872
9.032
7.598 0.182 1.734 0.056 0.072 0.094 0.498 0.083 0.145
All
43.558
3.232
10.649 9.239 0.297 3.589 0.035 0.014 0.013 2.481 0.442 0.606
All/Q
42.117
4.043
9.752
2.682 0.091 1.197 0.474 0.034 0.049 2.521 0.200 0.455
K
Shapley Values in Databases
Shapley values have been studied in the data management
literature to quantify the contribution of tuples to query an-
swers (Livshits et al. 2021; Deutch et al. 2022; Davidson
et al. 2022; Alizad and Milani 2025), and, in databases that
violate integrity constraints, to the extent of that inconsis-
tency (Bertossi et al. 2023). In this setting, the players of the
cooperative game are tuples, the value function is the query
output on a subset of the database, and an endogenous/exoge-
nous partition controls which tuples are subject to attribution.
Work in this line has established the computational complex-
ity of exact Shapley computation over conjunctive queries
(CQs) (Livshits et al. 2021), practical algorithms based on
data provenance and knowledge compilation (Deutch et al.
2022; Davidson et al. 2022), and relation-aware sampling
for efficient estimation (Alizad and Milani 2025). Where
integrity constraints appear, they are themselves the object
of explanation (i.e., tuples are scored by how much they
contribute to inconsistency), rather than constraints on the
coalitional game. Our work is orthogonal: we explain the
predictions of black-box ML models trained on relational
data, with features as players, and use relational structure
as constraints on which coalitions and completions count as
valid.
A growing line of database research adapts the Shapley
value to attribute the contribution of tuples (or facts) to the
results of queries, and, in a related sub-line, to the extent of a
database’s inconsistency with respect to integrity constraints.
Livshits et al. (2021) initiated the formal study: they model
query evaluation as a cooperative game in which endogenous
tuples act as players and the query’s truth value (for Boolean
CQs) or numerical output (for aggregate queries) acts as
the wealth function. They establish a fundamental complex-
ity dichotomy—Shapley computation is in polynomial time
for hierarchical CQs and FP#P-complete otherwise—and
give an a fully polynomial-time randomized approximation
scheme (FPRAS) for summation queries via Monte Carlo
sampling.
Subsequent work has focused on making these semantics
practical. Deutch et al. (2022) reduce Shapley computation to
probabilistic query evaluation and develop an exact algorithm
based on knowledge compilation of Boolean provenance into


20
21
22
23
24
25
0
5
10
15
20
Kernel
20
21
22
23
24
25
# Background data
MC
20
21
22
23
24
25
Leverage
BG = 125 × 2k
Default
BG
BG/Q
Running time (sec/sample)
(a) Running time as the number of background data points varies for
Churn.
20 21 22 23 24 25 26
0
2
4
6
Kernel
20 21 22 23 24 25 26
# Background data
MC
20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Leverage
BG = 125 × 2k
Default
BG
BG/Q
Running time (sec/sample)
(b) Running time as the number of background data points varies for
TPC-H.
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
0
5
10
15
20
Kernel
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
# Coalitions
MC
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Leverage
Default
BG
BG/Q
Running time (sec/sample)
(c) Running time as the number of coalitions varies for Churn.
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
0
2
4
6
Kernel
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
# Coalitions
MC
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Leverage
Default
BG
BG/Q
Running time (sec/sample)
(d) Running time as the number of coalitions varies for TPC-H.
Figure 11: Average running time (sec/sample) as the number of background data points varies up to the per-dataset maximum
B and the number of coalitions varies up to the convergence budget Mconv in Table 4, for Churn and TPC-H (log scale on the
x-axis).
deterministic and decomposable (d-D) circuits, together with
a faster CNF-Proxy heuristic for ranking; their experiments
on TPC-H and IMDB demonstrate that provenance-based
Shapley computation is feasible for a large fraction of real-
istic queries. Davidson et al. (2022) build ShapGraph that
pairs the global provenance-graph view of query derivations
with local Shapley heatmaps over input tuples, letting an-
alysts navigate between a structural (how) and a quantita-
tive (how much) account of a given output tuple. Alizad
and Milani (2025) introduces Relation-Stratified Sampling,
a sampling strategy that partitions the Shapley subset space
by the number of tuples drawn from each relation and allo-
cates samples adaptively, yielding lower-variance estimates
than generic Monte Carlo and classical stratified sampling
on TPC-H workloads. Bertossi et al. (2023) study both the
query-answer and the database-inconsistency applications;
in the latter, integrity constraints (ICs) are themselves the
object being explained, and tuples are scored by how much
their presence contributes to violations of the ICs.
Table 20 summarizes these efforts along four axes: what
the Shapley game explains, who the players are, what tech-
nical contribution is made, and how integrity constraints
are treated. RelShap departs from all of them along the
first two axes: the object of explanation is a black-box ML
model’s prediction on a flattened relational instance, and the
players are features of that instance rather than tuples of the
underlying database. This shift is not cosmetic: as Exam-
ple 1 illustrates and Section 4 quantifies, applying Shapley
to a flattened instance without accounting for the relational
structure may produce different explanations.
Consequently, we use relational structure—schema-level
FDs, query-induced FDs, discovered FDs, and provenance—
as structural constraints on the Shapley game itself, rather
than as an object to be explained or as a purely computational
device for tractability.
L
Limitations
Human evaluation. Our controlled validation (Section 4.1)
establishes that RelShap corrects attributions with respect
to relational validity under known ground truth, and Sec-
tion 4.2 shows these corrections are large and systematic on
real data. However, we do not evaluate whether the corrected
explanations are more useful, trustworthy, or actionable for
human decision-makers. A user study with practitioners who
consume Shapley explanations (e.g., in credit or hiring con-
texts) is important future work.
Constraint quality. RelShap treats the selected con-
straint set Σ as correct. Data-driven FDs are exact depen-
dencies on finite data, so small or unrepresentative samples
can yield spurious FDs; conversely, meaningful dependen-
cies that hold only approximately (e.g., with rare exceptions
or noise) are not discovered by exact FD mining. The user


20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29210211
0
5
10
Kernel
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29210211
# Background data
MC
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29210211
Leverage
BG = 100 × 2k
Default
BG
BG/Q
400,000
Running time (sec/sample)
(a) Running time as the number of background data points varies for
MovieLens-20M with MLP-PLR.
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
0
5
10
15
20
Kernel
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
# Coalitions
MC
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
Leverage
Default
BG
BG/Q
Running time (sec/sample)
(b) Running time as the number of coalitions varies for SpeedDating
with logistic regression.
Figure 12: Average running time (sec/sample) as the number of background data points and coalitions varies for additional
model–dataset pairs.
125
250
500 1000 2000 4000 8000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Kernel
125
250
500 1000 2000 4000 8000
# Background data
MC
125
250
500 1000 2000 4000 8000
Leverage
BG
BG/Q
BG+Prov,St
BG+Prov,St/Q
BG+Prov,Rel
BG+Prov,Rel/Q
Running time (sec/sample)
(a) Running time as the number of background data points varies for
Churn Modelling with XGBoost under richer provenance settings.
20
21
22
23
24
25
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Kernel
20
21
22
23
24
25
# Coalitions
MC
20
21
22
23
24
25
Leverage
BG
BG/Q
BG+Prov,St
BG+Prov,St/Q
BG+Prov,Rel
BG+Prov,Rel/Q
Running time (sec/sample)
(b) Running time as the number of coalitions varies for Churn Mod-
elling with XGBoost under richer provenance settings.
Figure 13: Average running time (sec/sample) as the number of background data points and coalitions varies under richer
provenance settings for Churn Modelling with XGBoost.
inspection step (Section 3.1) mitigates but does not elimi-
nate this risk, and extending RelShap to approximate or
probabilistic constraints is a natural direction.
Table 15: Percentage of cases showing runtime reduction
across datasets and estimators, including Default vs. RelShap
(BG) and RelShap (BG) vs. RelShap (BG/Q). The highest
value in each dataset (row) is highlighted in bold.
Dataset
Kernel
MC
Leverage
Amazon
33.33%
75.00%
50.00%
Churn
87.50%
95.83%
100.0%
Churn Modelling
16.67%
91.67%
54.17%
German Credit
0.000%
75.00%
91.67%
SpeedDating
91.67%
76.19%
79.17%
TPC-H
100.0%
100.0%
79.17%
UW-CSE
0.000%
100.0%
91.67%
MovieLens 20M
41.67%
100.0%
100.0%
Synthetic
33.33%
95.83%
100.0%


0
Ker
0.009
Lev
0.992
MC
ˆRMconv
0
25
50
75
100
Runtime reduction (%)
ρ = 0.875
τ = 0.833
Amazon Employee Access
0.013
MC
0.048
Lev
0.072
Ker
ˆRMconv
0
6
12
18
ρ = 0.875
τ = 0.833
SpeedDating
0.263
Lev
0.849
Ker
0.911
MC
ˆRMconv
0
25
50
75
ρ = 1.000
τ = 1.000
TPC-H
0.031
Ker
0.594
Lev
0.596
MC
ˆRMconv
0
20
40
60
80 ρ = 1.000
τ = 1.000
UW-CSE
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
XGBoost
MLP-PLR
0.369
Lev
0.534
Ker
0.568
MC
ˆRMconv
0
20
40
60
Runtime reduction (%)
ρ = 0.625
τ = 0.500
Churn
0
Lev
0.019
Ker
0.969
MC
ˆRMconv
0
25
50
75
100 ρ = 1.000
τ = 1.000
Churn Modelling
0.053
Ker
0.094
MC
0.303
Lev
ˆRMconv
0
8
16
24
32 ρ = 0.875
τ = 0.833
German Credit
0.131
Ker
0.645
MC
0.75
Lev
ˆRMconv
0
20
40
60
80 ρ = 0.500
τ = 0.333
MovieLens20M
0.328
Lev
0.409
Ker
0.47
MC
ˆRMconv
0
15
30
45
60 ρ = 0.500
τ = 0.333
Synthetic
Logistic Regression
Random Forest
XGBoost
MLP-PLR
Figure 14: Runtime reduction (%) versus the empirical runtime speedup factor ˆRMconv across datasets and models (Default vs.
RelShap (BG)). Each point corresponds to a configuration at Mconv. Shaded regions indicate variability across seeds. Ker, MC,
and Lev denote Kernel SHAP, Monte Carlo, and Leverage SHAP.
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
L1 distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Top-3 Jaccard distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1 - RBO
Kernel SHAP
Conditional SHAP
ManifoldShap
RelShap (FD-only)
Figure 15: Attribution and ranking changes under the FD age →life_stage as the strength δ of relationally invalid
perturbations increases.


0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
L1 distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Top-3 Jaccard distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1 - RBO
Kernel SHAP
Conditional SHAP
ManifoldShap
RelShap (FD-only)
RelShap (FD + Prov)
Figure 16: Attribution and ranking changes when incorporating both the FD age →life_stage and the provenance
constraints from Example 1.
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
L1 distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Top-3 Jaccard distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1 - RBO
Kernel SHAP
Conditional SHAP
ManifoldShap
RelShap (FD-only)
Figure 17: Attribution and ranking changes on German Credit as the influence of δ increases.


0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
L1 distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Top-3 Jaccard distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1 - RBO
Kernel SHAP
Conditional SHAP
ManifoldShap
RelShap (FD-only)
(a) FD-only setting.
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
L1 distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Top-3 Jaccard distance
0
2
4
6
8
10
δ
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
1 - RBO
Kernel SHAP
Conditional SHAP
ManifoldShap
RelShap (FD-only)
RelShap (FD + Prov)
(b) FD + Prov setting.
Figure 18: Attribution and ranking changes on UW-CSE as the influence of δ increases.


Table 16: Relational invalidity on datasets without DCs. Each cell reports averaged violation prevalence (top) and violation
density (bottom) over three random seeds, in percentage.
Dataset
Estimator
BG
BG + Prov, Strict BG + Prov, Relaxed
Amazon
Kernel
55.956
36.598
77.762
34.501
89.359
34.843
MC
51.350
33.666
70.210
31.938
80.147
32.649
Leverage
55.095
34.508
77.959
33.249
90.317
33.966
Churn
Kernel
96.120
23.642
96.122
28.683
96.125
28.627
MC
93.466
28.188
93.467
32.365
93.469
32.320
Leverage
97.721
29.560
97.722
33.377
97.724
33.313
Churn Modelling
Kernel
90.240
17.321
90.479
20.537
90.481
20.320
MC
84.992
17.725
85.160
20.963
85.162
20.762
Leverage
95.187
20.313
95.394
23.556
95.395
23.278
German Credit
Kernel
18.910
4.395
71.969
16.562
77.132
16.284
MC
20.469
4.787
75.195
18.096
79.719
17.827
Leverage
21.617
4.967
78.244
18.567
83.176
18.266
MovieLens 20M
Kernel
87.748
47.969
87.748
47.969
87.748
47.969
MC
71.621
39.704
71.621
39.704
71.621
39.704
Leverage
99.081
47.589
99.081
47.589
99.081
47.589


Table 17: Relational invalidity on datasets with DCs. Each cell reports averaged violation prevalence (top) and violation density
(bottom) over three random seeds, in percentage. All denotes BG + DCs + Prov, Relaxed.
Dataset
Estimator
BG
BG + DCs BG + Prov, Strict BG + Prov, Relaxed
All
SpeedDating
Kernel
88.509
12.219
88.509
3.164
91.294
17.524
91.695
17.611
91.695
10.530
MC
97.889
20.037
97.889
5.188
98.270
23.743
98.336
23.764
98.336
14.976
Leverage
97.889
20.037
97.889
5.188
98.270
23.743
98.336
23.764
98.336
14.976
TPC-H
Kernel
98.704
16.320
98.704
16.183
98.705
17.664
98.706
17.669
98.706
17.523
MC
94.816
19.906
94.816
19.742
94.816
21.100
94.816
21.102
94.816
20.932
Leverage
99.999
19.332
99.999
19.170
99.999
20.682
100.000
20.684
100.000
20.515
UW-CSE
Kernel
5.806
1.632
6.675
1.585
7.243
1.829
10.244
1.770
10.819
1.730
MC
4.654
1.287
5.601
1.267
5.824
1.435
8.293
1.434
9.038
1.413
Leverage
5.445
1.535
6.316
1.494
6.844
1.722
9.955
1.684
10.553
1.648
Synthetic
Kernel
80.475
14.203
80.475
12.374
91.892
20.661
91.919
20.466
91.919
18.487
MC
75.607
14.660
75.607
12.772
86.302
21.381
86.322
21.189
86.322
19.154
Leverage
77.742
15.004
77.742
12.982
94.370
22.649
94.390
22.362
94.390
20.167


Algorithm 6: ProvExpand: Dropped-identifier based local
mask expansion
1: Input: mask m; instance x; dropped identifiers D; FD
set ΣFD (|LHS| ≤2); inverted index I; row-sets RS;
threshold τ; mode ∈{Strict, Relaxed}
2: Output: expanded mask m
3: if (m, x) ∈cache then return cache[(m, x)]
4: end if
5: S ←{fj | mj = 1}
6: ˆx ←Canonicalize(x)
▷ˆx cached per instance
// Stage 1: build per-identifier candidate sets via inverted
index
7: hits ←BuildHits(D, S, ˆx, τ, mode)
// Stage 2: multi-identifier row intersection
8: if |hits| ≥2 then
9:
m
←
ApplyByIntersection(hits, RS, S, m,
ΣFD, τ, mode)
10:
S ←{fj | mj = 1}
11: end if
// Stage 3: per-identifier rule application (using updated
S)
12: for each id ∈D with 0 < |Cid| ≤τ do
13:
for each (L →r) ∈ΣFD involving id with L ⊆S
do
14:
mr ←1
15:
end for
16: end for
17: S ←{fj | mj = 1}
// Stage 4: Over-threshold identifiers (mode = Relaxed
only)
18: if mode = Relaxed then
19:
for each id ∈D do
20:
Kid ←{f ∈S | f determines id}
21:
Cid ←T
f∈Kid I[id][f][ˆxf]
22:
if |Cid| > τ then
23:
Rconst
id
←
features
constant
across
RS[id][Cid]
24:
for each (L →r) ∈ΣFD involving id with
L ⊆S, r ∈Rconst
id
do
25:
mr ←1
26:
end for
27:
end if
28:
end for
29: end if
30: cache[(m, x)] ←m
31: return m
Algorithm 7: ICRepair: Repairing input data points under
integrity constraints (domain and denial constraints)
1: for each input data point x do
2:
xfixed ←{xj | mj = 1}
▷fixed (do not modify)
3:
xrepair ←{xj | mj = 0}
▷repairable
4:
for each rule (ℓ⇒r) ∈Σdom do
5:
if xrepair satisfies ℓbut violates r then
6:
modify xrepair to satisfy r
▷
policy-dependent
7:
end if
8:
end for
9:
for each ψ ∈Σden do
10:
if xrepair violates ψ then
11:
modify only xrepair to satisfy ψ
12:
end if
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return x
Table 18: Estimator-level relational invalidity averaged
across datasets without DCs. Each cell reports averaged vi-
olation prevalence (top) and violation density (bottom), in
percentage.
Estimator
BG
BG + Prov, Strict BG + Prov, Relaxed
Kernel
69.795
25.985
84.816
29.650
88.169
29.609
MC
64.379
24.814
79.131
28.613
82.024
28.652
Leverage
73.740
27.388
89.680
31.268
93.139
31.282


Table 19: Estimator-level relational invalidity averaged across datasets with DCs. Each cell reports averaged violation prevalence
(top) and violation density (bottom), in percentage. All denotes BG + DCs + Prov, Relaxed.
Estimator
BG
BG + DCs BG + Prov, Strict BG + Prov, Relaxed
All
Kernel
68.373
11.094
68.591
8.327
72.284
14.420
73.141
14.379
73.285
12.068
MC
68.242
13.972
68.478
9.742
71.303
16.915
71.942
16.872
72.128
14.119
Leverage
70.269
13.977
70.486
9.709
74.871
17.199
75.670
17.124
75.820
14.326
Table 20: Shapley-value approaches in database (DB) research. All prior work uses DB tuples/facts as players and explains a
property of the DB (query answer or inconsistency w.r.t. integrity constraints). RelShap instead explains ML model predictions
on flattened relational data, with features as players, and uses relational structure as a constraint on the coalitional game.
Work
Object explained
Players
Key technical contribution
Role of ICs
Livshits
et
al.
(Livshits
et al. 2021)
Query
answer
(Boolean / aggre-
gate CQ)
Endogenous
tu-
ples
Complexity dichotomy (hierarchical
CQs in polynomial time, else FP#P-
complete); FPRAS for summation via
MC
Not part of the setup
Deutch
et
al. (Deutch et al.
2022)
Query answer
Endogenous
tu-
ples
Reduction to probabilistic QE; knowl-
edge compilation of provenance into
d-D circuits; CNF-Proxy heuristic
Not part of the setup
ShapGraph (David-
son et al. 2022)
Query answer (per
output tuple)
Input tuples
Interactive system pairing provenance
graphs with Shapley heatmaps (built
on ProvSQL)
Not part of the setup
Alizad (Alizad and
Milani 2025)
Query answer
Endogenous
tu-
ples
Relation-Stratified Sampling (RSS)
and adaptive variant (ARSS) with
lower-variance estimates on TPC-H
Not part of the setup
Bertossi
et
al.
(Bertossi
et al. 2023)
Query answer and
DB inconsistency
Endogenous
tu-
ples
Survey; covers tuple contribution to
inconsistency w.r.t. ICs as a second
Shapley application in data manage-
ment
Object of explanation
(tuples scored by contri-
bution to IC violations)
RelShap (ours)
ML-model predic-
tion on a flattened
relational instance
Features
Relationally consistent background
and coalition selection, grounded in
schema/query/discovered FDs and
provenance; Shapley invariance and
runtime-reduction results
Structural constraint
on
the
coalitional
game
