Title: Deep Learning as Neural Low-Degree Filtering: A Spectral Theory of Hierarchical Feature Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13612v1

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 01:24:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 62

Markdown Content:
# Deep Learning as Neural Low-Degree Filtering: A Spectral Theory of Hierarchical Feature Learning 

Yatin Dandi 1,2, Matteo Vilucchio 1, Luca Arnaboldi 1, Hugo Tabanelli 1, Florent Krzakala 11Information Learning and Physics Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) 

> 2

Statistical Physics of Computation Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) May 14, 2026 

Abstract 

Understanding how deep neural networks learn useful internal representations from data remains a central open problem in the theory of deep learning. We introduce Neural Low-Degree Filtering (Neural LoFi), a stylized limit of gradient-based training in which hierarchical feature learning becomes an explicit iterative spectral procedure. In this limit, the dynamics at each layer decouple: given the current representation, the next layer selects directions with maximal accessible low-degree correlation to the label. This yields a tractable surrogate mechanism for deep learning, together with a natural kernel-space interpretation. Neural LoFi provides a mathematically explicit framework for studying multi-layer feature learning beyond the lazy regime. It predicts how representations are selected layer by layer, explains how emergence of concepts arises with given sample complexity, and gives a concrete mechanism by which depth progressively constructs new features from old ones through low-degree compositionality. We complement the theory with mechanistic experiments on fully connected and convolutional architectures, showing that Neural LoFi improves over lazy random-feature baselines, recovers meaningful structured filters, and predicts representations aligned with early gradient-descent feature discovery with real datasets. 

# 1 Introduction 

One of the most striking features of modern deep learning [1] is the ability of neural networks to learn complex high-dimensional functions from data with extraordinary effectiveness [2]. Yet this empirical success still outpaces our theoretical understanding. A large body of empirical work suggests that deep networks do not merely fit input-output relations, but progressively build structured representations. In convnets, feature-visualization studies have shown that successive layers extract patterns of increasing complexity, from local edge-like detectors to more semantic motifs [3]. Transfer-learning experiments indicate that earlier layers tend to contain more general features, whereas deeper layers become increasingly specialized to the task [4]. The 

platonic representation viewpoint has emphasized that models often learn surprisingly aligned representations across architectures and training procedures [5]. These observations point to a central challenge: 

Can we understand which features are discovered during training, in which order, and at what sample complexity? And can we understand why some functions are learned more efficiently with multi-layer models? 

Several theoretical perspectives have clarified important parts of this picture. In the lazy regime [6], or equivalently in the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) limit [7, 8], training is described as kernel regression in an essentially fixed feature space, giving a powerful theory of optimization and generalization but largely bypassing feature learning. Mean-field analyses of two-layer networks capture genuine parameter evolution 1

> arXiv:2605.13612v1 [cs.LG] 13 May 2026

and representation learning [9 – 12], while tensor-program and dynamical mean-field theory approaches provide a general framework for infinite-width limits, including feature-learning regimes under suitable parametrizations [13 –16]. In parallel, stylized high-dimensional models, such as single-index and multi-index settings, have made it possible to analyze when neural networks recover latent structure from data [17 – 20], and recent work has begun to clarify the computational role of depth in synthetic toy models [21 – 26]. Still, we lack a simple predictive mechanism for how deep networks select, organize, and refine features across layers. In this work, we propose such a mechanism, which we call Neural Low-Degree Filtering (Neural LoFi). Neural LoFi is a stylized, mathematically tractable iterative spectral surrogate for feature learning: Given a current representation, each layer forms a label-weighted moment operator on the current features, selects its leading eigendirections, and lifts the resulting projected features through a nonlinear random feature map. This procedure is motivated by a stylized small-initialization limit of gradient-based training, in which the feature-learning component of the layerwise dynamics is governed by a Hessian-like, label-weighted second-order operator. The analysis of Neural LoFi leads to two main lessons. First, at a fixed representation, feature learning is governed by a relevance–complexity trade-off: the next layer selects features that have large low-degree correlation with the label while remaining simple in the geometry induced by the current representation. Neural LoFi makes this trade-off explicit through a variational problem, where relevance is measured by supervised low-degree correlation and complexity by the RKHS norm. This variational view also yields an 

explicit, data-driven criterion for feature emergence : a new direction becomes learnable when its population correlation rises above the empirical noise floor, whose scale is controlled by the residual effective dimension of the current kernel. Second, depth makes this process powerful because the selected features are lifted into a new representation, changing the geometry in which the next layer searches for signal. Thus a deep network can turn structure that is high-degree in the input into structure that is low-degree in an intermediate representation. This leads to a principle of low-degree compositionality : deep learning is efficient when each stage of the target is not only compositional, but visible through low-degree correlations in the current representation. The same viewpoint also gives a kernel interpretation of feature learning: Neural LoFi constructs a sequence of task-adaptive kernels, one per layer, rather than a single fixed kernel chosen before seeing the labels. In this sense, depth allows for an adaptive multilayer kernel construction driven by supervised low-degree feature selection. Although we use Neural LoFi primarily as a theoretical lens, the resulting procedure is also of independent interest: it is layerwise, backpropagation-free, and based only on label-weighted low-degree moments of the current representation. In this sense, it provides a simple spectral primitive for feature discovery, sitting between fixed random-feature models, which do not adapt their representation, and full end-to-end backpropagation, whose dynamics are much harder to analyze. The rest of the paper develops this picture. We first introduce Neural LoFi and motivate its label-weighted moment operator from the early feature-learning dynamics of gradient descent. We then derive an RKHS variational characterization, which makes explicit the relevance–complexity trade-off solved at each layer. This leads to a criterion for feature emergence, expressed through the residual effective dimension of the current kernel, and to the principle of low-degree compositionality. We conclude with a study of a solvable mathematical model that illustrates out main point (emergence of features and low-degree compositionality), and with real-data experiments, including fully connected and convolutional architectures, illustrating the predicted mechanisms arising in practice. A public implementation, together with code to reproduce the numerical illustrations, is available at https: //github.com/IdePHICS/Neural-LoFi-Theory .22 Neural Low-Degree Filtering 

2.1 Setup and guiding approximation 

We now define Neural LoFi and present its feature-space and kernel interpretations. Its derivation as a surrogate for early gradient-based feature learning is given in App. A. Consider supervised data 

Dn = {(xμ, y μ)}nμ=1 , xμ ∈ Rd, yμ ∈ R,

with scalar labels for simplicity (The extension to vector-valued outputs is discussed in App. C). We assume throughout this section that the labels are centered, and write bEn for the empirical average over the training set. A depth-L neural network builds a sequence of representations 

z0(x) = x, hℓ(x) = Wℓzℓ−1(x), zℓ(x) ∈ Rpℓ = σ(hℓ(x)) , ℓ = 1 , . . . , L, (1) for sequence of widths p1, · · · , p L. For structured architectures, such as convolutional networks, the same notation should be read locally: zℓ−1(x) is replaced by the local patch or feature vector seen by a filter, and the corresponding estimator is averaged over spatial locations. The model’s output is then defined by a readout applied to the final layer ˆf (x) = ⟨aL, zL(x)⟩. (2) Fix a layer ℓ, and consider the preactivation hℓ,i (x) = ⟨wℓ,i , zℓ−1(x)⟩. We show in Appendix A, that under a layer-wise vanishing initialization scheme aL ≪ WL−1 ≪ · · · W1, the training of different neurons in a layer, can be described up to leading approximation through a linear dynamics consisting of two terms: 

i) a constant drift along a mean direction given by ˆuℓ ∈ Rpℓ and ii ), a linear projection along the matrix 

bC(ℓ) ∈ Rpℓ×pℓ , with ˆuℓ, bC(ℓ) defined by: 

ˆuℓ := 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμzℓ−1(xμ), bC(ℓ) := 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμ zℓ−1(xμ)zℓ−1(xμ)⊤. (3) This result is formalized below, which is a consequence of Taylor’s theorem and the fact that under a layer-wise vanishing scaling of initializations, interactions between neurons within the same layer and between the present layer and the subsequent, untrained layers, are suppressed: 

Proposition 1 (Informal) . Suppose that ˆf (x) is trained through layer-wise gradient descent with initialization scale aL ≪ WL−1 ≪ · · · W1. Then, for any η > 0, and layer ℓ, any fixed neuron wℓ,i for i ∈ pℓ, satisfies for small enough time: 

wℓ,i (t + 1) − wℓ,i (t) ≈ η c 0 ˆuℓ + η c 1 bC(ℓ) wℓ,i (t) + O( wℓ,i (0) 2), (4) 

for some constants c0, c 1 > 0.

The first term in Eq. 4 is the linear correlation between the current representation and the label. It can be removed by centering, by fitting the best linear predictor in the current representation, or simply interpreted as the degree-one component of the dynamics. The second term, however, is the first genuinely multiple feature-learning component. Let bC(ℓ) = ˆV Λ ˆV ⊤ denote the eigendecomposition. For small step-size, the linear term c1 bC(ℓ) wℓ,i (t) yields the per-neuron approximation wℓ,i (t) ≈ exp( c1 bC(ℓ)t) wℓ,i (0) . Stacking the 

pℓ neuron weights into the row matrix Wℓ(t) ∈ Rpℓ×pℓ−1 with i-th row wℓ,i (t)⊤, the dynamics splits into two interpretable pieces: 

Wℓ(t) ≈ Wℓ(0) exp  c1 bC(ℓ) t = Wℓ(0) ˆV

| {z }

> random transformation

× exp( c1 Λ t) ˆV ⊤

| {z }  

> spectral filter →top-eigenvector projection

. (5) 3Algorithm 1 Neural Low-Degree Filtering 

Require: Dataset {(xμ, y μ)}nμ=1 , depth L, ranks {kℓ}Lℓ=1 , widths {pℓ}Lℓ=1  

> 1:

Initialize z0(x) ← x and p0 = d. 

> 2:

for ℓ = 1 , . . . , L do  

> 3:

ˆuℓ ← 1/n

Pnμ=1 yμzℓ−1(xμ), ˆvℓ 

> 0

← ˆuℓ/∥ ˆuℓ∥ ▷ Estimate linear component, normalize  

> 4:

Form the label-weighted moment operator: 

bC(ℓ) ← 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμ zℓ−1(xμ)zℓ−1(xμ)⊤ ∈ Rpℓ−1×pℓ−1 . 

> 5:

bVℓ = [ˆ vℓ

> 0

, ˆv(ℓ)1 , . . . , ˆv(ℓ) 

> kℓ

] ∈ Rpℓ−1×kℓ , with ordered kℓ eigenvectors by decreasing |ˆλ|. 

> 6:

gℓ(x) ← bV ⊤ 

> ℓ

zℓ−1(x) ∈ Rkℓ . ▷ Project onto the learned feature subspace  

> 7:

zℓ(x) ← 1/√pℓσ(Rℓgℓ(x)) , Rℓ ∈ Rpℓ×kℓ . ▷ Lift by nonlinear random feature map  

> 8:

Fit a final linear or logistic readout a on zL(x). 

> 9:

return Final predictor ˆf (x) = ⟨a, zL(x)⟩

The second part depends only on bC(ℓ): it projects onto the eigen-basis of bC(ℓ) and reweighs each direction by exp( c1λ(ℓ) 

> r

t), exponentially amplifying directions with the largest eigenvalues, so an early-stopped power iteration will approximate hard projection onto the top-k eigenvectors as t grows. The first part Wℓ(0) ˆV

is t−independent: it is a fixed random linear transformation of those eigenvectors, inherited from the i.i.d. initialization of the neuron weights. The post-training feature map σ Wℓ(t) zℓ−1(x) at each layer is there-fore, to leading order, the composition of (i) a spectral filter that selects the leading eigen-directions of bC(ℓ)

and (ii) a random per-neuron mixing of those directions: small-initialization training acts, to leading order, as a spectral filtering of the representation. While the exponential weighting in Equation 5 holds under vanishing initialization and small time-scales, we expect, in general, the network to maintain a preference towards features corresponding to larger eigenvalues for other training regimes. We discuss how weighting regimes arise under different training settings for two-layer networks in App. B. The simplest choice of such weights is top-k selection: w(λ(ℓ) 

> r

) = 1 for r ≤ k

for some k, and 0 otherwise, which we use in Alg.1. Unlike the general gradient descent dynamics involving complex interactions across layers and neurons, the regime identified by Proposition 1 is sequential across layers and decoupled across neurons. We call this the 

Neural LoFi regime and put forward the following hypothesis: 

The Neural LoFi regime described by Proposition 1 provides a tractable surrogate towards understanding hierarchical learning in deep neural networks. 

2.2 The Neural Low-Degree Filtering algorithm 

The decomposition in Eq. (5) directly motivates the two operations of Neural LoFi (Algorithm 1), which replace the implicit dynamics of the Neural LoFi regime (Proposition 1) with two concrete, decoupled steps per layer: First, a filter step projects the current representation onto the leading eigen-directions of the label-weighted moment operator bC(ℓ), making the spectral filter explicit as bVℓ. Second, a lift step applies a nonlinear random feature map Rℓ that emulates the per-neuron randomness of the left factor Wℓ(0) ˆV in Eq. (5), producing the next representation. 410 2 10 3 10 4

ntrain 

> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> Test error (%)

GD steps = 100   

> 10 210 310 4

ntrain 

GD steps = 200   

> 10 210 310 4

ntrain 

GD steps = 500   

> 10 210 310 4

ntrain 

GD steps = 1000 

> FC spectral FC GD CNN spectral CNN GD FCN LoFi
> FCN GD
> CNN LoFi
> CNN GD

Figure 1: Neural LoFi versus gradient descent/backpropagation (GD). Test error on binary CIFAR-10 [27] (animals vs. vehicles) for fully connected networks (FCN) and convolutional networks (CNN). We compare Neural LoFi with networks trained by gradient descent/backpropagation, shown for different numbers of training steps. In the low-data regime, and at early training times even with more data, Neural LoFi matches or exceeds GD, illustrating that the spectral surrogate captures an efficient supervised feature-extraction mechanism. 

The matrix bVℓ defines the learned feature projection at layer ℓ. The projections 

gℓ(x) = bV ⊤ 

> ℓ

zℓ−1(x) (6) are the features selected by low-degree filtering. The random nonlinear lift σ(Rℓgℓ) then re-expands these selected coordinates into a richer representation, so that the next layer can search for new low-degree correlations in the transformed feature space. The projection step can be interpreted as a weighted principal component analysis : The linear component ˆuℓ gives the direction in the feature space zℓ−1(x) maximizing the linear correlation with y, and the top eigenvectors of bC(ℓ) extract the most relevant directions 1 in feature space zℓ−1(x) weighted by their 2nd -order correlation with y.Figure 1 gives a first sanity check for Neural LoFi as a surrogate for gradient-based feature learning. We compare it with backpropagation on the binary CIFAR-10 animal-vs.-vehicle task, for both fully connected and convolutional architectures. The results show that Neural LoFi can match early GD performance, especially in the low-data regime, while remaining a one-pass spectral procedure. We return to these experiments in detail in Section 4. 

2.3 Function-space and kernel interpretation 

The projection components [ˆ vℓ

> 0

, ˆv(ℓ)1 , . . . , ˆv(ℓ) 

> kℓ

] reside in the dual space w.r.t. the features zℓ−1 and are themselves not directly interpretable and depend on the choice of random projection weights Rℓ−1, · · · , R 1.However, we show below that the resulting features ⟨ ˆu(ℓ), zℓ−1(x)⟩ and ⟨ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

, zℓ−1(x)⟩, for j = 1 , . . . , k ℓ,admit a clear description in terms of low-degree projections of y onto the RKHS defined by the previous layer. Furthermore, the features converge to deterministic infinite-width limits. Let 

Kℓ−1(x, x′) = ⟨zℓ−1(x), zℓ−1(x′)⟩ (7) be the kernel induced by the current representation, and let Hℓ−1 be its Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS [28, 29]). Through an analogue of the classical representer theorem (Lemma 1), we show that for any 

> 1In some experiments, we did not even kept the linear component, as the second-order components are numerous and seem to suffice for extracting the most relevant features.

5j ∈ kℓ, the features φj (x) := ⟨ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

, zℓ−1(x)⟩, lie in the subspace spanned by {Kℓ−1(xμ, ·)}nμ=1 , and satisfy the equivalence of norms given by ∥φj (x)∥Hℓ−1 = ∥ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

∥2. Since ˆv(ℓ)1 maximizes v⊤ bC(ℓ)v subject to the 

∥v∥2 = 1 , we obtain the equivalent criterion: 

ˆv(ℓ)1 ∈ arg max 

> ∥v∥2=1

1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμ⟨v, zℓ−1(xμ)⟩2 → φ(ℓ)1 ∈ arg max  

> ∥φ∥Hℓ−1=1

1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμ φ(xμ)2 . (8) Maximizing this correlation with the label, together with the norm constraint in feature space, leads to the fundamental conclusion: 

Neural LoFi searches for features that are simple in the geometry induced by the previous layer, but 

predictive through their low-degree correlation with the task. 

This is the sense in which the method is a low-degree filter. We show in App.E, how this can be turned into a practical kernel version of our approach. This is formalized through the following result, furthermore showing that they converge to the eigenfunctions of the limiting infinite-width kernel as the layer width grows: 

Theorem 1 (Variational characterization and infinite-width convergence) . Let ˆvℓ 

> 0

denote the linear component and [ˆ v(ℓ)1 , . . . , ˆv(ℓ) 

> kℓ

] the ordered eigenvectors from Algorithm 1. Define the linear feature 

ψℓ(x) := ⟨ˆvℓ

> 0

, zℓ−1(x)⟩,

and the second-order features φj (x) := ⟨ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

, zℓ−1(x)⟩ for j = 1 , . . . , k ℓ. Then: (i) Linear feature. ψℓ is the unit-norm maximizer of the empirical first-order correlation with y:

ψℓ = arg max   

> ψ:∥ψ∥Hℓ−1=1

bEn

y ψ (x) . (9) 

(ii) Second-order features. For each k = 1 , . . . , k ℓ, φk is the unit-norm maximizer of the empirical second-order correlation, successively orthogonalized to the previously selected features: 

φk = arg max   

> φ:∥φ∥Hℓ−1=1
> φ⊥φ1,...,φ k−1

bEn

y φ (x)2 . (10) 

(iii) Infinite-width convergence. Let K∞ 

> ℓ−1

denote the infinite-width limiting kernel obtained as the layer width pℓ−1 → ∞ , and let {ϕ∞ 

> k

}k≥1 be its eigenfunctions ordered by decreasing eigenvalue magnitude with the selected limiting eigenvalues separated from the rest of the spectrum. Then, for any pseudo-lipschitz (of finite order) σ(·), and any fixed k, as pℓ−1 → ∞ ,

φk −→ ϕ∞ 

> k

,

where convergence is in L2 under the data distribution, and ϕ∞ 

> 1

, · · · , ϕ ∞ 

> k

satisfy the corresponding limiting deterministic variational criteria. 

The above characterization in feature space translates to an explicit recursion over the kernels defined by each layer, once the selected features φ(ℓ)1 , . . . , φ (ℓ) 

> kℓ

are obtained, define gℓ(x) =  φ(ℓ)1 (x), . . . , φ (ℓ) 

> kℓ

(x). If the next layer is a random nonlinear lift, then the induced kernel is 

Kℓ(x, x′) = Er

h

σ(r⊤gℓ(x)) σ(r⊤gℓ(x′)) 

i

. (11) 6This recursion is the kernel-level form of feature learning. Unlike a fixed kernel method, with a single geometry before seeing the labels, Neural LoFi constructs a sequence of task-adaptive kernels K0 −→ 

K1 −→ · · · −→ KL, where each transition is supervised: the next kernel is built from the low-complexity features in Hℓ−1 whose squared activations are most correlated with the label. Neural LoFi thus turns deep learning into an explicit procedure for adaptive kernel construction. 

# 3 Neural LoFi lessons: emergence and low-degree compositionality 

Neural LoFi is not proposed here as a replacement for backpropagation, but as a tractable, simpler, surrogate for understanding learning. This section now attempts to draw lessons from the surrogate. 

3.1 Emergence of concepts, effective dimension, and a criterion 

A growing body of empirical evidence suggests that learning is often not a smooth process: training dynamics can display long plateaus followed by abrupt transitions, with new directions in representation space emerging sequentially rather than all at once [30 – 33]. Neural LoFi provides a simple mechanism for this phenomenon. By Theorem 1, the kth feature extracted by layer ℓ maximizes the following second-order 

empirical correlation: 

bρ(k) 

> ℓ

:= sup   

> ∥φ∥Hℓ−1=1 ,φ ⊥φ1,··· ,φ k−1

bEn

h

y φ (x)2i

, (12) where Hℓ−1 is the RKHS induced by the representation after ℓ − 1 layers, and bEn is the empirical average over data. This variational form gives a direct criterion for feature emergence. Suppose that the features 

φ1, · · · , φ k−1 have been extracted and define the set of candidate features as: 

Sℓk := 

n

φ ∈ H ℓ−1 : ∥φ∥Hℓ−1 = 1 , φ ⊥ φ1, · · · , φ k−1

o

. (13) For a fixed unit-norm feature φ ∈ S ℓk, define 

cℓ(φ) := E

h

y φ (x)2i

, bcℓ,n (φ) := bEn

h

y φ (x)2i

. (14) The empirical correlation bcℓ,n (φ) fluctuates around its population value cℓ(φ). Since Neural LoFi optimizes over a class of candidate features, the relevant measure of variance is the uniform fluctuation over Sℓk,

τ kℓ (n) := sup 

> φ∈S ℓk

bcℓ,n (φ) − cℓ(φ) . (15) To recover the population minimizer feature, the variance must be small w.r.t. the population correlation 

ρ(k) 

> ℓ

:= sup 

> φ∈S ℓk

E

h

y φ (x)2i

. (16) Hence, the criterion for the emergence of a feature at layer ℓ becomes: 

ρ(k) 

> ℓ

≫ τ kℓ (n). (17) 7Below this threshold, the leading empirical direction is dominated by noise. Above it, a task-dependent direction separates from the noise and becomes learnable: Feature emergence is thus akin to a phase transition à la Baik-Ben Arous-Péché/Edwards-Jones (BBP/EA) [34, 35]. We show in Appendix F, using local Rademacher-complexity bounds over Sℓk [36, 37], that up to poly-logarithmic factors: 

τ kℓ (n) ≲ rkℓ

s

Deff 

> ℓ,k

(rkℓ )

n , (18) where Deff 

> ℓ,k

(r) is the residual effective dimension of features with scale r (see Def.1) within the current RKHS after removing the previously extracted features [38, 39], and rkℓ := arg max r(r

q

Deff 

> ℓ,k

(r)) is the dominant scale of fluctuations among candidate features. This can be estimated from the empirical spectrum of the kernel, making Eq.(17) a data-driven diagnostic for emergence of concepts. We develop this formalization of emergence further in Appendix F. The criterion recovers known sample-complexity scales in solvable hierarchical models [40 – 44]. More importantly, on real data it predicts the sample scale at which learned concepts appear in different layers: in the CIFAR-10 experiment of Section 4, individual eigenvector overlaps rise near the predicted thresholds; see Fig. 5. This makes Neural LoFi a quantitative theory of layerwise concept emergence. 

3.2 Why depth helps: low-degree compositionality 

While approximation-theoretic works show that deep networks can represent certain compositional functions much more efficiently than shallow ones, especially in tree-like or hierarchical settings [45, 46], efficient representation does not by itself imply efficient learning. The previous discussion motivates the notion of 

low-degree compositionality : depth is useful to learn functions when each layer exposes a new low-degree signal that is visible in the representation constructed by the previous layers. This means that the target admits a sequence of intermediate representations 

x −→ z1(x) −→ z2(x) −→ · · · −→ zL(x),

such that, at each stage, the next useful representation is visible through a low-degree statistic of the current one. In the second-order Neural LoFi mechanism, this is precisely the condition that the population counterpart of Equation (12) is larger than the statistical noise floor. Thus, at layer ℓ, Neural LoFi asks whether the current representation contains a simple feature whose second-order statistics are predictive of the task. This gives a learnability criterion for compositional structure: A deep model does not benefit from 

arbitrary compositions ; it benefits from hierarchies in which each intermediate step exposes a statistically detectable low-degree signal . Equivalently, the target should become progressively simpler when expressed in the learned coordinates. 

A function may be high-degree, or otherwise complex, as a function of the original input, while still being learnable through a sequence of low-degree problems : Depth then converts one hard estimation problem in the input space into several easier estimation problems in adapted representation spaces. 

This perspective is consistent with a growing body of theoretical work on idealized models, where com-positional structure leads to sequential feature recovery and sample-complexity gains from depth, see: [21 –26, 41, 47]. Neural LoFi abstracts a common principle from these settings: a useful hierarchy is one whose next layer is statistically visible through low-degree correlations in the representation already learned. This viewpoint is in particular related to the compositional information exponent introduced for hierarchical Gaussian targets [25]. In that setting, one assumes access to a planted hierarchy of intermediate features 8h⋆ℓ (x) and asks for the smallest degree q such that 

E

h

(h⋆ℓ (x)) ⊗qf ⋆(x)

i

> F

= Θ(1) . (19) A low compositional exponent means that the target has a strong low-degree dependence on the hidden intermediate representation. Instead of assuming access to h⋆ℓ , Neural LoFi searches over the current learned feature space through Eq. (12) , and acts as a data-adaptive compositional information test by asking whether the current representation contains simple, statistically visible features that are predictive of the task. In this sense, Neural LoFi implements a supervised coarse-graining procedure: Each layer keeps a small number of task-relevant directions and discards much of the irrelevant high-dimensional variation, in a way reminiscent of physics renormalization-inspired views of learning across scales [48]. 

3.3 Further related works 

Hessian and spectral learning Hessian-based spectral information has long played a central role in statistical physics and high-dimensional inference, for instance in community detection [49], spiked matrix– tensor models [50 –52], and BBP/EA-type selection mechanisms [34,35]. Related label-weighted second-order operators also appear in single-index and multi-index estimation, where they yield spectral initializations and recovery procedures [53 – 56]. More recently, similar operators have been connected to the early dynamics of shallow neural networks through Hessian or Hessian-like interpretations [40, 57 – 59]. Neural LoFi extends this viewpoint beyond the first initial layer and to iterative multi-layer methods. 

Beyond second order While the second-order operator (3) is the first nontrivial term in the expansion, higher-order terms correspond to tensor correlations between the current representation and the label. In Gaussian single-index and multi-index models, such higher-degree components govern harder directions and later learning time scales, as captured by information, leap, and generative exponents [19, 20, 60 – 62]. Higher-order LoFi variants could replace yφ 2 by higher-degree statistics, but would lead to (difficult) tensor spectral problems, as tensor PCA can be notably harder than matrix PCA [63 – 66]. This limitation also points to a natural future direction: Multi-pass gradient descent can break the constraints imposed by information and leap exponents by repeatedly transforming the effective label and representation [67] as well as through staircase mechanisms [51, 68 –71]. An interesting direction for future work is a multi-pass Neural LoFi, alternating low-degree spectral filtering with target/residual transformations and feature correction, that would connect the present mechanism to the more powerful generative-exponent/SQ-type learnability picture. We further discuss connections with this theoretical literature in App.B. 

Quadratic networks and spectral feature learning. A closely related line of work studies quadratic and polynomial networks, where the feature-learning component of the dynamics is especially transparent. Early works analyzed the optimization landscape and recovery properties of one-hidden-layer or polyno-mial networks through tensor and low-rank structure [72 –75]. More recent high-dimensional analyses of overparameterized quadratic networks show that ERM can be mapped to matrix sensing with nuclear-norm regularization, so that capacity control emerges through low-rank learned feature maps [76]. Even closer to our perspective, [77] characterize the spectra of trained quadratic and diagonal networks in the feature-learning regime: informative directions appear as spectral outliers or spikes, while the bulk corresponds to learned noise or overfitting and should be pruned. A related bulk-plus-spikes picture was later observed in attention models [78]. This mirrors the Neural LoFi mechanism: the Hessian-like label-weighted operator extracts task-correlated spectral directions and discards the residual bulk. 9This viewpoint is also consistent with empirical observations that trained deep networks often exhibit structured, non-random spectra in their learned weights with eigenvalues popping out of the bulk [79]. 

Scattering, coarse-graining, and multiscale representations Our construction is related in spirit to scattering transforms [80]. Both scattering and Neural LoFi build representations through a multilevel cascade of filtering and nonlinear lifting. The key difference is that scattering uses fixed analytic filters, typically wavelets, designed for invariance and stability, whereas Neural LoFi is supervised and task-adaptive: each layer selects directions through a label-weighted spectral operator on the current representation. This also resonates with coarse-graining and renormalization-inspired views of deep representations [81]. 

Rainbow networks The rainbow analysis of [82] gives a post-training description of deep nets: trained layers behave like random feature maps with learned, often low-rank, weight covariances, yielding deter-ministic hierarchical kernels in the infinite-width limit. In this view, feature learning amounts to identifying low-dimensional covariance structure between random high-dimensional embeddings. Neural LoFi provides a possible mechanism for the emergence of this structure: its label-weighted spectral operator selects the task-correlated directions to keep, while the subsequent random lift re-expands them into a new feature space. 

Mechanistic interpretability Neural LoFi is complementary to mechanistic interpretability, which aims to reverse-engineer trained networks into interpretable features and circuits [83, 84]. Rather than starting from a trained model and asking which circuits implement a behavior, Neural LoFi asks why certain features are selected during training. Its basic objects are spectral directions in representation space, not necessarily individual neurons, aligning with the modern “features as directions” viewpoint underlying superposition [85]. 

Recursive Feature Machines A recent line of work proposed the average gradient outer product (AGOP) as a mechanism for feature learning and uses it to define Recursive Feature Machines, iterative algorithms for adaptive feature learning and dimensionality reduction [86, 87]. This is close in philosophy to Neural LoFi: both seek a simple iterative surrogate for representation learning. The constructions differ, however. AGOP-based methods use gradient covariances of a learned predictor, whereas Neural LoFi crucially uses the next order approximation with the Hessian. 

Local and backpropagation-free learning In spirit, Neural LoFi is also related to local alternatives to backpropagation, including feedback alignment and direct feedback alignment [88 – 90], local-loss and layerwise training methods [91, 92], target propagation [93], and biologically inspired plasticity rules [94, 95]. Although Neural LoFi is not proposed as a biologically faithful model, it is backpropagation-free and layerwise: its spectral operator can be approximated by label-modulated Hebbian/Oja-style updates [95 – 98]. 

Pruning Neural LoFi also gives a feature-space perspective on why overparameterization and pruning are not contradictory. Classical pruning methods show that many weights or connections can be removed after training with little loss in performance [99, 100], while the lottery-ticket hypothesis suggests that large dense networks may contain smaller trainable subnetworks [101]. In Neural LoFi, width and rank play complementary roles: large width creates a rich feature space in which task-correlated directions can be discovered, while pruning retains only the directions that finite data can reliably support. Thus large networks are useful for discovery, but low-rank feature selection controls the effective dimension used for prediction. 10 1 2 3

log( n)=log( d)

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

1.1 

> MSE

d = 80 

d = 100 

d = 120 

d = 140 

1 2 3

log( n)=log( d)

0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

> Overlap  h (1)

¡0.2 0.0 0.2 

Eigenvalue 

10 ¡1

10 0

10 1

10 2

> Density

Bulk 

Top d1 = 10 Figure 2: Neural LoFi in a mathematically solvable model : We used data generated by the two-level target Eq. (21) ,with ( k = 2 ), latent dimension d1 = ⌊dϵ⌋, ϵ = 12 , and final readout g⋆(t) = tanh( t), learned by a Neural LoFi approach. For d ∈ { 80 , 100 , 120 , 140 }, we use first-layer random-feature widths p1 ∈ { 20000 , 30000 , 40000 , 50000 } and second-layer widths p2 ∈ { 512 , 768 , 1024 , 1280 }. The final one-dimensional non-linearity is fitted with a polynomial kernel of maximal degree 5, using ridge regularization 10 −6 and kernel regularization 10 −4. Left: Mean Squared Error (MSE) of the final predictor as a function of α, for input dimensions d ∈ { 80 , 100 , 120 , 140 }. Notice the drop at the predicted sample complexity for feature learning n ∝ d2.5. Center: Overlap between the recovered first-layer representation 

bh(1) and the ground-truth latent variables h(1) . Right: Spectrum of the first random-feature spectral operator bC1 for 

d = 100 at α = 3 , where d1 = 10 , showing the emergent informative features. 

# 4 Mechanistic illustrations: from a solvable model to real data 

For this section, codes are available at https://github.com/IdePHICS/Neural-LoFi-Theory .

4.1 A solvable model 

We first consider a toy model in which the full Neural LoFi mechanism can be inspected mathematically, that illustrates the salient feature discussed in the former section: emergence and low-degree compositionality .Following the hierarchical polynomial constructions of [41 – 44], let x ∼ N (0 , I d) and generate labels through a planted compositional hierarchy x −→ h(1) (x) −→ h(2) (x) −→ y. Let Hk(x) denote the degree-k

Hermite feature vector of the input. We plant d1 = dε random directions A(1) 1 , . . . , A(1)  

> d1

in this degree-k

feature space, together with a random symmetric matrix A(2) ∈ Rd1×d1 acting on the first hidden layer. The hidden variables are 

h(1)  

> i

(x) = A(1)  

> i

, H k(x) , i = 1 , . . . , d 1, (20) and the second representation is a quadratic function of these variables, 

h(2) (x) = A(2) , H 2(h(1) (x)) , y = g⋆(h(2) (x)) . (21) While the target is high-degree as a function of the input, it factors into low-degree transitions: h(1) is degree-k in x, and h(2) is quadratic in h(1) . This is why the model is useful for illustrating both the advantage of feature learning and the advantage of depth: A fixed kernel or random-feature method [102] sees only the composed map x 7 → y; if g⋆ contains a degree-r component, then for k = 2 this includes degree-4r structure in the input. No learning whatsoever would arise before at least n = O(d4) data just to beat a random guess! 11 10 2 10 3 10 4

n      

> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> 20
> 22
> 24
> 26
> Test Error (%)
> 3L RF ( p= 5k)
> 3L RF ( p= 10k)
> Ridge
> NLoFi ( p= 5k)
> NLoFi ( p= 10k) 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> k2
> 14 .2%
> n=5k
> 13 .2%
> n=10k
> 10 110 210 3

k1  

> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> k2
> 12 .6%
> n=20k
> 10 110 210 3

k1

> 12 .0%
> n=50k
> 15 20 25

Figure 3: Fully connected Neural LoFi on the CIFAR-10 animal-vs.-vehicle task. Left: Test error vs number of training samples for ridge regression, three-layer random features, and Neural LoFi, with projection dimensions p = 1k and 

p = 5k . Right: Test error over the number of retained features (k1, k 2) in the first two LoFi layers, for different training-set sizes and fixed projection dimension p = 5k . Stars indicate the best point in each grid. 

A two-layer feature learner can already improve on such a one-shot approach by recovering the first hidden representation h(1) , but the remaining target is still a nonlinear function of the d1 = dε latent variables, and thus we still face the curse of dimension (over d1 instead of dε). This is where the multi-layer approach solve the problem: A second feature-learning step provides the depth advantage: once h(1) is recovered, the next hidden variable h(2) is only a quadratic spectral problem in dimension d1, followed by a one-dimensional readout. The model realizes the separation identified in [41], but now with Neural LoFi itself: Each layer lowers the effective degree of the remaining task by making the next hidden variable visible through a low-degree statistic. The final target is therefore learned by Neural LoFi progressively, and efficiently, building the correct intermediate representation, rather than by fitting the full high-degree map x 7 → y in one shot. Appendix D provides the corresponding mathematical theorems and synthetic experiments, demonstrating feature emergence at the predicted sample scales (Eq.17), spectral outlier formation, alignment with the planted features, and recovery of the final compositional target. We thus refer to Appendix D for more details and just briefly illustrate here the performance of Neural LoFi in Fig. 2: The function becomes learnable at n ≫ Dkd1 = O(dk+ε), which, in the quadratic case used in the experiments, is n ≫ d2+ ε. Around this scale, the Neural LoFi estimator simultaneously shows a drop in prediction error, a sharp increase in overlap with the planted representation, and the separation of the leading eigenvalues from the spectral bulk (see right panel in Fig. 2 as well as Fig. 7 showing the emergence of learned features in the first layer in Appendix). 

4.2 Fully connected networks (FCN) 

We now focus on experiments on real data, intended as mechanistic illustrations of the theory, not as a claim that Neural LoFi is a competitive training algorithm. Fig.3 (FCN on CIFAR-10 [27]) illustrates two qualitative predictions: i) the label-weighted LoFi operator extracts useful directions beyond those available to fixed random features, leading to a consistent improvement over ridge and random-feature baselines. ii) feature selection is non-trivial: the best test error is not always achieved by keeping the largest number of features. As the sample size grows, the optimal number of retained features increases or remains 12 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4

n

> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> j v(n)
> i ; v(N)
> i
> ®j2

Layer 1          

> i= 1
> i= 2
> i= 3
> i= 4
> i= 5
> i= 6
> 10 110 210 310 4

n

Layer 2 Figure 5: Predicting when individual features emerge on CIFAR-10. For a three-layer fully connected Neural LoFi model on the CIFAR-10 animal-vs.-vehicle task, we track the squared overlap |⟨ v(n) 

> i

, v (N ) 

> i

⟩| 2 between eigenvectors estimated from n samples and large-sample reference eigenvectors computed with N = 60 ,000 samples. Curves show mean ± SEM over 100 random subsamples at fixed random features. Dashed vertical lines indicate the predicted emergence thresholds niℓ from (17) , (18) (for further details, see Eq. (116) in Appendix). The sharp rise of each overlap near its predicted threshold shows that the effective-dimension criterion predicts when individual task-relevant directions become learnable. 

stable, matching the signal-to-noise picture in which weaker directions become accessible with more data. 0 25 50 75 

Gradient Step 

> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> Overlap (Normalized)  Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 Layer 4

Figure 4: Layer-wise normalized overlap (see App. G.2) between features learned by SGD at different steps with the Neural LoFi repre-sentation, for a four-layer FCN on CIFAR-10. 

We also compare Neural LoFi with a standard back-propagation approach: The overlap in Fig. 4 appears to grow during the early stages of training, indicating that LoFi approximates the initial feature-discovery phase of SGD. This is further supported by the aforementioned Fig. 1, that shows direct test-error comparisons between GD and Neural LoFi. At later times, the alignment plateaus or decreases, suggesting that backpropagation eventu-ally moves beyond the one-step LoFi approximation and learns features involving richer training dynamics. Most directly, Fig. 5 tests the feature-emergence criterion of Eqs. (17) and (18) . We compare each eigenvector learned from 

n samples with a large-sample reference eigenvector, and mark the predicted emergence thresholds. The overlap curves rise close to these thresholds, showing that the effective-dimension crite-rion predicts the sample scale at which individual task-relevant directions ("concepts") become learnable. Additional details on this experiment are given in App. G.5; further numerical evidence, including spectra of the bC operator and experiments with the infinite-width Neural LoFi kernel, is reported in App. G. 

4.3 Convolutional networks (CNN) 

Neural LoFi is not restricted to fully connected architectures: the moment operator can be built in the feature space exposed by the architecture. This makes it natural to incorporate structural inductive biases such as locality, weight sharing, equivariance, or graph structure, in the spirit of geometric deep learning [103]. Here, we consider convolutional networks. Let zℓ−1(xμ) ∈ Rsℓ×pℓ−1 denote the input features to layer ℓ, where 

sℓ is the number of spatial locations and pℓ−1 is the number of channels. We define the operator in channel 13 R G BFigure 6: Neural LoFi with convolutional layers on the CIFAR-10 animal-vs.-vehicle task. Neural LoFi recovers the usual structures and edge detectors associated to GNN without backpropagation or end-to-end optimization Left: Top first-layer filters obtained from the three RGB input channels. Right: Activations of the sixth LoFi feature on test images at successive depths; top row shows the input images, lower rows the corresponding activation maps. 

space as: 

bC(ℓ) := 1

ns ℓnX

> μ=1
> sℓ

X

> j=1

yμ zℓ−1(xμ)j zℓ−1(xμ)⊤ 

> j

. (22) The top eigenvectors of bC(ℓ) define the task-relevant channel directions retained at layer ℓ; the resulting features are then passed through the same fixed random lifting used by Neural LoFi. We remind that Fig. 1 showed how similar direct GD optimization is to Neural LoFi at early training time. The convolutional experiment also gives the most direct visual evidence for low-degree compositionality. Applying the LoFi operator directly to pixels already recovers familiar low-level visual features: a leading color-sensitive direction, followed by localized contrast and edge-like filters. Several later filters resemble finite-difference or Laplacian-like stencils, echoing classical edge-filter emergence in natural image models [104] and the early filters learned by CNNs trained with gradient descent [3, 105, 106]. In appendix, we further show in Fig. 11 the feature-emergence criterion of Eqs. (17) and (18) for GNN, as we did for FCN in Fig.5. Strikingly, these salient visual structures emerge without backpropagation or end-to-end optimization : they are obtained simply by diagonalizing the Neural LoFi label-weighted moment operator. This shows that part of early visual feature learning is already captured by the low-degree supervised correlations emphasized by our theory. Depth then turns these simple local filters into more selective features. In Figure 6, the same LoFi feature behaves like a generic edge or contrast detector at shallow depth, but becomes increasingly selective after successive LoFi layers, responding only to more structured spatial patterns. This is, again, the qualitative mechanism suggested by the theory: each layer extracts a low-degree task-correlated component from the current representation, and repeated extraction builds progressively more structured features. Additional experiments (including the spectrum of the operators, and different datasets) are presented in App. G. 

# 5 Conclusion 

We introduced Neural LoFi , a tractable spectral theory of multilayer feature learning beyond the lazy regime. The framework turns deep representation learning into an explicit layerwise procedure: given a current 14 representation, each layer selects low-degree features that are both task-correlated and simple in the geometry induced by previous layers. This yields a concrete relevance–complexity principle for feature selection, a quantitative criterion for when new features emerge, and a principle of low-degree compositionality : depth helps when each layer makes the next useful signal statistically detectable. This picture is visible beyond idealized models. Neural LoFi improves over random-feature baselines, predicts the sample scale at which layerwise features emerge, aligns with early gradient-descent representations, and recovers salient convolutional filters without backpropagation. Together, these results suggest that part of deep feature learning is already captured by supervised low-degree spectral structure. The deliberate simplicity of Neural LoFi also delineates a clear research program. Theoretically, it remains to understand the long-time dynamics of the task-adaptive kernels generated by LoFi, their behavior beyond second-order filtering, and their extension to structured architectures such as attention. Algorithmically, the main challenge is to scale LoFi from a mechanistic surrogate into a useful training primitive—for initialization, feature pretraining, pruning, or diagnostics. Incorporating data reuse, multi-pass dynamics, and backward feature correction would bring the framework closer to trained networks. 

# Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank Bruno Loureiro and Lenka Zdeborová for discussions and encouragement. We acknowledge funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation grants OperaGOST (grant number 

200021 _200390 ) and DSGIANGO (grant number 225837 ). This work was supported by the Simons Collab-oration on the Physics of Learning and Neural Computation via the Simons Foundation grant ( #1257412 ). 

# References 

[1] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. Deep learning. nature , 521(7553):436–444, 2015. [2] Terrence J Sejnowski. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep learning in artificial intelligence. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(48):30033–30038, 2020. [3] Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In European conference on computer vision , pages 818–833. Springer, 2014. [4] Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. How transferable are features in deep neural networks? Advances in neural information processing systems , 27, 2014. [5] Minyoung Huh, Brian Cheung, Tongzhou Wang, and Phillip Isola. The platonic representation hypothesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07987 , 2024. [6] Lénaïc Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in differentiable programming. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [7] Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and general-ization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. [8] Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear models under gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. 15 [9] Song Mei, Andrea Montanari, and Phan-Minh Nguyen. A mean field view of the landscape of two-layer neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115(33):E7665–E7671, 2018. [10] Lénaïc Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-parameterized models using optimal transport. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. [11] Grant M Rotskoff and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Neural networks as interacting particle systems: Asymp-totic convexity of the loss landscape and universal scaling of the approximation error. stat , 1050:22, 2018. [12] Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos. Mean field analysis of neural networks: A law of large numbers. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics , 80(2):725–752, 2020. [13] Ge Yang, Edward Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ryder, Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tuning large neural networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:17084–17097, 2021. [14] Karl Hajjar, Lénaïc Chizat, and Christophe Giraud. Training integrable parameterizations of deep neural networks in the infinite-width limit. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(196):1–130, 2024. [15] Blake Bordelon and Cengiz Pehlevan. Self-consistent dynamical field theory of kernel evolution in wide neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:32240–32256, 2022. [16] Rosalba Pacelli, Sebastiano Ariosto, Mauro Pastore, Francesco Ginelli, Marco Gherardi, and Pietro Rotondo. A statistical mechanics framework for bayesian deep neural networks beyond the infinite-width limit. Nature Machine Intelligence , 5(12):1497–1507, 2023. [17] Behrooz Ghorbani, Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. When do neural networks outperform kernel methods? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:14820– 14830, 2020. [18] Alberto Bietti, Joan Bruna, Clayton Sanford, and Min Jae Song. Learning single-index models with shallow neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:9768–9783, 2022. [19] Alex Damian, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, Jason Lee, and Joan Bruna. Computational-statistical gaps in gaussian single-index models. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory , pages 1262–1262. PMLR, 2024. [20] Emanuele Troiani, Yatin Dandi, Leonardo Defilippis, Lenka Zdeborová, Bruno Loureiro, and Florent Krzakala. Fundamental computational limits of weak learnability in high-dimensional multi-index models. In The 28th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 2025. [21] Jerome Garnier-Brun, Marc Mezard, Emanuele Moscato, and Luca Saglietti. How transformers learn structured data: Insights from hierarchical filtering. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 18831–18847. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025. [22] Francesco Cagnetta, Leonardo Petrini, Umberto M Tomasini, Alessandro Favero, and Matthieu Wyart. How deep neural networks learn compositional data: The random hierarchy model. Physical Review X, 14(3):031001, 2024. 16 [23] Alessandro Favero, Francesco Cagnetta, and Matthieu Wyart. Locality defeats the curse of dimension-ality in convolutional teacher-student scenarios. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,34:9456–9467, 2021. [24] Alessandro Favero, Antonio Sclocchi, Francesco Cagnetta, Pascal Frossard, and Matthieu Wyart. How compositional generalization and creativity improve as diffusion models are trained. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12089 , 2025. [25] Yatin Dandi, Luca Pesce, Lenka Zdeborová, and Florent Krzakala. The computational advantage of depth in learning high-dimensional hierarchical targets. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. [26] Yunwei Ren, Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, and Jason D. Lee. Provable learning of random hierarchy models and hierarchical shallow-to-deep chaining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.19756 , 2026. [27] Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, University of Toronto, 2009. [28] Ingo Steinwart and Andreas Christmann. Support Vector Machines . Springer, 2008. [29] Bernhard Schölkopf and Alexander J. Smola. Learning with Kernels: Support Vector Machines, Regularization, Optimization, and Beyond . MIT Press, 2002. [30] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , 2022, 2022. [31] Allan Raventós, Mansheej Paul, Feng Chen, and Surya Ganguli. Pretraining task diversity and the emergence of non-bayesian in-context learning for regression. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:14228–14246, 2023. [32] Sanjeev Arora and Anirudh Goyal. A theory for emergence of complex skills in language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15936 , 2023. [33] Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of large language models a mirage? Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:55565–55581, 2023. [34] Jinho Baik, Gérard Ben Arous, and Sandrine Péché. Phase transition of the largest eigenvalue for nonnull complex sample covariance matrices. Annals of probability , 33(5):1643–1697, 2005. [35] Samuel F Edwards and Raymund C Jones. The eigenvalue spectrum of a large symmetric random matrix. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General , 9(10):1595–1603, 1976. [36] Shahar Mendelson. On the performance of kernel classes. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,4:759–771, 2003. [37] Peter L Bartlett, Olivier Bousquet, and Shahar Mendelson. Local rademacher complexities. The Annals of Statistics , 33(4):1497–1537, 2005. [38] Andrea Caponnetto and Ernesto De Vito. Optimal rates for the regularized least-squares algorithm. 

Foundations of Computational Mathematics , 7(3):331–368, 2007. [39] Alessandro Rudi and Lorenzo Rosasco. Generalization properties of learning with random features. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. 17 [40] Leonardo Defilippis, Florent Krzakala, Bruno Loureiro, and Antoine Maillard. Optimal scaling laws in learning hierarchical multi-index models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05846 , 2026. [41] Hugo Tabanelli, Yatin Dandi, Luca Pesce, and Florent Krzakala. Deep learning of compositional targets with hierarchical spectral methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10867 , 2026. [42] Eshaan Nichani, Alex Damian, and Jason D. Lee. Provable guarantees for nonlinear feature learning in three-layer neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 10828–10875, 2023. [43] Zihao Wang, Eshaan Nichani, and Jason D. Lee. Learning hierarchical polynomials with three-layer neural networks. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [44] Hengyu Fu, Zihao Wang, Eshaan Nichani, and Jason D. Lee. Learning hierarchical polynomials of multiple nonlinear features. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. [45] Hrushikesh Mhaskar, Qianli Liao, and Tomaso Poggio. When and why are deep networks better than shallow ones? In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 31, February 2017. [46] Matus Telgarsky. Benefits of depth in neural networks. In Proceedings of the 29th Conference on Learning Theory , volume 49 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1517–1539. PMLR, June 2016. [47] Francesco Cagnetta, Allan Raventós, Surya Ganguli, and Matthieu Wyart. Deriving neural scaling laws from the statistics of natural language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07488 , 2026. [48] Kenneth G Wilson. The renormalization group and critical phenomena. Reviews of Modern Physics ,55(3):583, 1983. [49] Alaa Saade, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Spectral clustering of graphs with the bethe hessian. Advances in neural information processing systems , 27, 2014. [50] Valentina Ros, Gérard Ben Arous, Giulio Biroli, and Chiara Cammarota. Complex energy landscapes in spiked-tensor and simple glassy models: Ruggedness, arrangements of local minima, and phase transitions. Physical Review X , 9(1):011003, 2019. [51] Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Giulio Biroli, Chiara Cammarota, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Who is afraid of big bad minima? analysis of gradient-flow in spiked matrix-tensor models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [52] Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Giulio Biroli, Chiara Cammarota, Florent Krzakala, Pierfrancesco Urbani, and Lenka Zdeborová. Marvels and pitfalls of the langevin algorithm in noisy high-dimensional inference. 

Physical Review X , 10(1):011057, 2020. [53] Yue M Lu and Gen Li. Phase transitions of spectral initialization for high-dimensional non-convex estimation. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA , 9(3):507–541, 2020. [54] Marco Mondelli and Andrea Montanari. Fundamental limits of weak recovery with applications to phase retrieval. In Conference On Learning Theory , pages 1445–1450. PMLR, 2018. [55] Antoine Maillard, Bruno Loureiro, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Phase retrieval in high dimensions: Statistical and computational phase transitions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:11071–11082, 2020. 18 [56] Matteo Vilucchio, Yatin Dandi, Matéo Pirio Rossignol, Cédric Gerbelot, and Florent Krzakala. Asymp-totics of non-convex generalized linear models in high-dimensions: A proof of the replica formula. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20003 , 2025. [57] Tony Bonnaire, Giulio Biroli, and Chiara Cammarota. The role of the time-dependent hessian in high-dimensional optimization. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment , 2025(8):083401, 2025. [58] Bohan Zhang, Zihao Wang, Hengyu Fu, and Jason D. Lee. Neural networks learn generic multi-index models near information-theoretic limit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.15120 , 2025. [59] Andrea Montanari and Zihao Wang. Phase transitions for feature learning in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01434 , 2026. [60] Gérard Ben Arous, Reza Gheissari, and Aukosh Jagannath. Online stochastic gradient descent on non-convex losses from high-dimensional inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(106):1–51, 2021. [61] Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. Sgd learning on neural networks: leap complexity and saddle-to-saddle dynamics. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory , pages 2552–2623. PMLR, 2023. [62] Alex Damian, Jason D. Lee, and Joan Bruna. The generative leap: Tight sample complexity for efficiently learning gaussian multi-index models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. [63] Samuel B Hopkins, Jonathan Shi, and David Steurer. Tensor principal component analysis via sum-of-square proofs. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 956–1006. PMLR, 2015. [64] Thibault Lesieur, Léo Miolane, Marc Lelarge, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Statistical and computational phase transitions in spiked tensor estimation. In 2017 ieee international symposium on information theory (isit) , pages 511–515. IEEE, 2017. [65] Alexander S Wein, Ahmed El Alaoui, and Cristopher Moore. The kikuchi hierarchy and tensor pca. In 

2019 IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) , pages 1446–1468. IEEE, 2019. [66] Gérard Ben Arous, Reza Gheissari, and Aukosh Jagannath. Algorithmic thresholds for tensor pca. The Annals of Probability , 48(4):2052–2087, 2020. [67] Yatin Dandi, Emanuele Troiani, Luca Arnaboldi, Luca Pesce, Lenka Zdeborová, and Florent Krzakala. The benefits of reusing batches for gradient descent in two-layer networks: breaking the curse of information and leap exponents. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 9991–10016, 2024. [68] Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix-Adsera, Matthew S Brennan, Guy Bresler, and Dheeraj Nagaraj. The staircase property: How hierarchical structure can guide deep learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:26989–27002, 2021. [69] Gérard Ben Arous, Cédric Gerbelot, and Vanessa Piccolo. Stochastic gradient descent in high dimensions for multi-spiked tensor pca. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18162 , 2024. [70] Lorenzo Bardone, Sebastian Goldt, et al. Sliding down the stairs: how correlated latent variables accelerate learning with neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235, pages 3024–3045, 2024. 19 [71] Hugo Tabanelli, Pierre Mergny, Lenka Zdeborová, and Florent Krzakala. Computational thresholds in multi-modal learning via the spiked matrix-tensor model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02664 , 2025. [72] Rong Ge, Jason D Lee, and Tengyu Ma. Matrix completion has no spurious local minimum. Advances in neural information processing systems , 29, 2016. [73] Luca Venturi, Afonso S Bandeira, and Joan Bruna. Spurious valleys in one-hidden-layer neural network optimization landscapes. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 20(133):1–34, 2019. [74] Stefano Sarao Mannelli, Eric Vanden-Eijnden, and Lenka Zdeborová. Optimization and generalization of shallow neural networks with quadratic activation functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:13445–13455, 2020. [75] Yossi Arjevani, Joan Bruna, Joe Kileel, Elzbieta Polak, and Matthew Trager. Geometry and optimiza-tion of shallow polynomial networks. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry , 10(2):174–209, 2026. [76] Vittorio Erba, Emanuele Troiani, Lenka Zdeborová, and Florent Krzakala. The nuclear route: Sharp asymptotics of erm in overparameterized quadratic networks. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [77] Leonardo Defilippis, Yizhou Xu, Julius Girardin, Vittorio Erba, Emanuele Troiani, Lenka Zdeborová, Bruno Loureiro, and Florent Krzakala. Scaling laws and spectra of shallow neural networks in the feature learning regime. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2026. [78] Fabrizio Boncoraglio, Vittorio Erba, Emanuele Troiani, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Inductive bias and spectral properties of single-head attention in high dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24914 , 2025. [79] Charles H Martin and Michael W Mahoney. Implicit self-regularization in deep neural networks: Evidence from random matrix theory and implications for learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(165):1–73, 2021. [80] Mathieu Andreux, Tomás Angles, Georgios Exarchakis, Roberto Leonarduzzi, Gaspar Rochette, Louis Thiry, John Zarka, Stéphane Mallat, Joakim Andén, Eugene Belilovsky, et al. Kymatio: Scattering transforms in python. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 21(60):1–6, 2020. [81] Tanguy Marchand, Misaki Ozawa, Giulio Biroli, and Stéphane Mallat. Multiscale data-driven energy estimation and generation. Phys. Rev. X , 13:041038, Nov 2023. [82] Florentin Guth, Brice Ménard, Gaspar Rochette, and Stéphane Mallat. A rainbow in deep network black boxes. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(350):1–59, 2024. [83] Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter. Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill , 2020. https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in. [84] Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread , 2021. [85] Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish, 20 Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. Toy models of superposition. 

Transformer Circuits Thread , 2022. [86] Aaditya Radhakrishnan, Daniel Beaglehole, Pratik Pandit, and Mikhail Belkin. Mechanism for feature learning in neural networks and backpropagation-free machine learning models. Science ,383(6690):1461–1467, 2024. [87] Aaditya Radhakrishnan, Mikhail Belkin, and Dmitriy Drusvyatskiy. Linear recursive feature ma-chines provably recover low-rank matrices. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,122(13):e2411325122, 2025. [88] Timothy P. Lillicrap, Daniel Cownden, Douglas B. Tweed, and Colin J. Akerman. Random synaptic feedback weights support error backpropagation for deep learning. Nature Communications , 7:13276, 2016. [89] Arild Nøkland. Direct feedback alignment provides learning in deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 29, 2016. [90] Julien Launay, Iacopo Poli, François Boniface, and Florent Krzakala. Direct feedback alignment scales to modern deep learning tasks and architectures. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9346–9360, 2020. [91] Arild Nøkland and Lars Hiller Eidnes. Training neural networks with local error signals. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , pages 4839–4850, 2019. [92] Eugene Belilovsky, Michael Eickenberg, and Edouard Oyallon. Decoupled greedy learning of cnns. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 736–745, 2020. [93] Dong-Hyun Lee, Saizheng Zhang, Asja Fischer, and Yoshua Bengio. Difference target propagation. In 

Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases , pages 498–515. Springer, 2015. [94] Bernd Illing, Wulfram Gerstner, and Johanni Brea. Biologically plausible deep learning—but how far can we go with shallow networks? Neural Networks , 118:90–101, 2019. [95] Bernd Illing, Jean Ventura, Guillaume Bellec, and Wulfram Gerstner. Local plasticity rules can learn deep representations using self-supervised contrastive predictions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 34, pages 30365–30379, 2021. [96] Erkki Oja. Simplified neuron model as a principal component analyzer. Journal of mathematical biology , 15(3):267–273, 1982. [97] Terence D Sanger. Optimal unsupervised learning in a single-layer linear feedforward neural network. 

Neural networks , 2(6):459–473, 1989. [98] Wulfram Gerstner, Marco Lehmann, Vasiliki Liakoni, Dane Corneil, and Johanni Brea. Eligibility traces and plasticity on behavioral time scales: experimental support of neohebbian three-factor learning rules. Frontiers in neural circuits , 12:53, 2018. [99] Yann LeCun, John Denker, and Sara Solla. Optimal brain damage. Advances in neural information processing systems , 2, 1989. [100] Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William Dally. Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural network. Advances in neural information processing systems , 28, 2015. [101] Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear mode con-nectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh, editors, Proceedings 

21 of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3259–3269. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. [102] Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, and Andrea Montanari. Generalization error of random feature and kernel methods: Hypercontractivity and kernel matrix concentration. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis , 59:3–84, 2022. [103] Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veliˇ ckovi´ c. Geometric deep learning: Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478 , 2021. [104] Bruno A Olshausen and David J Field. Emergence of simple-cell receptive field properties by learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature , 381(6583):607–609, 1996. [105] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-tional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 25. Curran Associates, Inc., 2012. [106] Adityanarayanan Radhakrishnan, Daniel Beaglehole, Parthe Pandit, and Mikhail Belkin. Mechanism for feature learning in neural networks and backpropagation-free machine learning models. Science ,383(6690):1461–1467, 2024. [107] Sebastian Goldt, Madhu Advani, Andrew M Saxe, Florent Krzakala, and Lenka Zdeborová. Dynamics of stochastic gradient descent for two-layer neural networks in the teacher-student setup. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [108] Yatin Dandi, Florent Krzakala, Bruno Loureiro, Luca Pesce, and Ludovic Stephan. How two-layer neural networks learn, one (giant) step at a time. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(349):1–65, 2024. [109] Alberto Bietti, Joan Bruna, and Loucas Pillaud-Vivien. On learning gaussian multi-index models with gradient flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19793 , 2023. [110] Luca Arnaboldi, Ludovic Stephan, Florent Krzakala, and Bruno Loureiro. From high-dimensional & mean-field dynamics to dimensionless odes: A unifying approach to sgd in two-layers networks. In 

The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory , pages 1199–1227. PMLR, 2023. [111] Gerard Ben Arous, Murat A Erdogdu, Nuri Mert Vural, and Denny Wu. Learning quadratic neural networks in high dimensions: SGD dynamics and scaling laws. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. [112] Francesco Cagnetta, Hyunmo Kang, and Matthieu Wyart. Learning curves theory for hierarchically compositional data with power-law distributed features. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [113] Garrett G. Wen, Hong Hu, Yue M. Lu, Zhou Fan, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. When does gaussian equivalence fail and how to fix it: Non-universal behavior of random features with quadratic scaling. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.03325 , 2025. [114] Nachman Aronszajn. Theory of reproducing kernels. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society , 68(3):337–404, 1950. [115] James Mercer. Functions of positive and negative type, and their connection with the theory of integral equations. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A , 209:415–446, 1909. 22 [116] Chandler Davis and W. M. Kahan. The rotation of eigenvectors by a perturbation. III. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis , 7(1):1–46, 1970. [117] Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2015. [118] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [119] Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández del Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy, Warren Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array programming with NumPy. Nature , 585(7825):357–362, September 2020. [120] Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, et al. Scipy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature methods , 17(3):261–272, 2020. [121] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,12:2825–2830, 2011. 23 A Neural LoFi from Gradient Descent 

In this section, our goal is to prove Proposition 1, whose formal version is stated below as Theorem 2, i.e. show that under layerwise training with vanishing initialization, the early-time dynamics of each layer produces spikes along the linear direction ˆuℓ and aligns with the top eigenvectors of bC(ℓ), for a standard fully-connected architecture without skip connections. Consider the standard L-layer network 

ˆf (x) = ⟨aL, zL(x)⟩, z0(x) = x, zℓ(x) = σ Wℓzℓ−1(x), ℓ = 1 , . . . , L, (23) with square loss L = 12n

P

> μ

(yμ − ˆf (xμ)) 2. The final readout aL ∈ RpL is fixed throughout training; the weight matrices Wℓ are updated layer-wise. We write wℓ,i for the i-th row of Wℓ and set 

αm := max  

> i

∥wm,i (0) ∥, m = 1 , . . . , L, (24) with αL+1 := ∥aL∥.

Assumption 1 (Layerwise scale separation) . The dataset, architecture, and activation are fixed. The scales, including the final readout scale αL+1 = ∥aL∥, form a strict hierarchy: for every ℓ and every 

m ∈ { ℓ + 1 , . . . , L + 1 },

αm = o(αℓ). (25) Thus later hidden layers, and the final readout, vanish on a strictly smaller asymptotic scale than the layer currently being trained. The hierarchy is used below in a scale-counting sense: every replacement of a later-layer quantity by its leading initialization-scale term carries at least one additional factor from some αm

with m > ℓ .

Assumption 2. σ : R → R is three times continuously differentiable, σ(0) = 0 , and ∥σ′∥∞, ∥σ′′ ∥∞, ∥σ′′′ ∥∞ <

∞.

Define the linear spike direction and the label-weighted covariance at layer ℓ:

ˆuℓ := 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμ zℓ−1(xμ), bC(ℓ) := 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμ zℓ−1(xμ)zℓ−1(xμ)⊤. (26) 

Theorem 2 (Layerwise GD approximation) . Under Assumptions 1–2, there exist constants τ, C > 0 such that the layerwise gradient descent run admits horizons 

Tℓ := 

 τ α ℓ

η



, ℓ = 1 , . . . , L, (27) 

with the following property: for every layer ℓ, every neuron i, and every 0 ≤ t ≤ Tℓ,

∥wℓ,i (t)∥ ≤ Cα ℓ.

Thus the layer receives an O(αℓ) update while staying on its initialization scale. Define the leading effective readout 

¯aℓ,i := cL−ℓ

> 0

h LY

> m=ℓ+1

Wm(0) 

⊤

aL

i 

> i

(28) 24 where c0 = σ′(0) . Suppose that the effective readout for neuron i is non-degenerate i.e.: 

|¯aℓ,i | ≥ crd αL+1 

> L

Y

> m=ℓ+1

αm (29) 

for a fixed crd > 0. For such neurons and 0 ≤ t < T ℓ,

wℓ,i (t + 1) − wℓ,i (t) = η c 0 ¯aℓ,i ˆuℓ + η ¯aℓ,i c1 bC(ℓ) wℓ,i (t) + Rℓ,i (t), (30) 

where c1 = σ′′ (0) . For every 0 ≤ t ≤ Tℓ the accumulated residual obeys 

> t−1

X

> s=0

Rℓ,i (s) ≤ Cα 3 

> ℓ

. (31) 

Equivalently, the spike contributes O(αℓ) over the horizon, the covariance-amplification term contributes 

O(α2 

> ℓ

), and the discarded part is O(α3 

> ℓ

). Thus the displayed approximation keeps the first two nontrivial orders in the layer-ℓ initialization scale. 

Remark 1. The three components in Equation (30) have the following roles: 

• Linear spike. ηc 0¯aℓ,i ˆuℓ is independent of the current weight; over the horizon Tℓ it moves the neuron by 

O(αℓ) toward the empirical label-feature correlation. 

• Covariance amplification. η¯aℓ,i c1 bC(ℓ)wℓ,i (t) is linear in the current weight and amplifies components aligned with the leading eigenvectors of bC(ℓ).

• Remainder. The per-step remainder is second order in the current layer scale, hence it accumulates to O(α3 

> ℓ

) over Tℓ ≍ αℓ/η steps. Terms coming from later layers are smaller by the scale hierarchy in Assumption 1. The proof below shows that ¯aℓ,i is the leading, sample-independent backpropagation coefficient along the path from layer ℓ to the readout. The non-degeneracy condition only excludes neurons whose leading backpropagation coefficient is accidentally cancelled; such neurons are inactive at the displayed order. 

A.1 Proof of Theorem 2 

Proof. All constants below may depend on the fixed data and architecture bounds, L and the derivative bounds of σ. We write K for a finite constant of this kind, changing from line to line, and do not track separate data, width, or label constants. For the standard architecture the gradient of the loss w.r.t. wℓ,i involves a single backpropagation path through all layers ℓ + 1 , . . . , L . Define the layer-to-layer Jacobian 

JLℓ (x) := ∂z L(x)

∂z ℓ(x) =

> L

Y

> m=ℓ+1

diag  σ′(hm(x)) Wm, hm(x) = Wmzm−1(x), (32) and the sample-dependent effective readout 

¯aℓ,i (x) := [ JLℓ (x)⊤aL]i.

By the chain rule, 

∇wℓ,i L = − 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

rμ ¯aℓ,i (xμ) σ′ uℓ,i (xμ) zℓ−1(xμ), rμ := yμ − ˆf (xμ), (33) 25 where uℓ,i (x) = ⟨wℓ,i , zℓ−1(x)⟩.The key observation is that, under Assumption 1, the activation derivatives along this path are well approxi-mated by their value at zero, so ¯aℓ,i (x) is approximated by the initialization-dependent coefficient in (28) .On the layerwise horizons considered below the representations are uniformly bounded and ∥Wm∥op ≲ αm.Hence ∥hm(x)∥ ≲ αm, and Taylor expanding σ′ around zero gives 

diag( σ′(hm(x))) = c0I + c1 diag( hm(x)) + O(α2

> m

), c0 = σ′(0) , c 1 = σ′′ (0) . (34) Let 

J(0)  

> Lℓ

:= cL−ℓ

> 0
> L

Y

> m=ℓ+1

Wm(0) 

with the convention that the empty product is the identity. Expanding the product for JLℓ (x) around this leading term gives the explicit scale bound 

∥JLℓ (x) − J(0)  

> Lℓ

∥op ≤ K



> L

Y

> m=ℓ+1

αm



> L

X

> m=ℓ+1

αm

 .

Since each αm = o(αℓ) for m > ℓ , the right-hand side is o(αℓ). Therefore 

∥JLℓ (x) − J(0)  

> Lℓ

∥op = o(αℓ), (35) and when ℓ = L the left-hand side is zero. Multiplying by the final readout gives, with γℓ = αL+1 

QLm=ℓ+1 αm,

|¯aℓ,i (x) − ¯aℓ,i | ≤ Kγ ℓ



> L

X

> m=ℓ+1

αm

 ,

while (29) gives the relative estimate 

|¯aℓ,i (x) − ¯aℓ,i ||¯aℓ,i | ≤ C

> L

X

> m=ℓ+1

αm = o(αℓ). (36) In particular, ¯aℓ,i (x) = ¯ aℓ,i (1 + εℓ,i (x)) with sup x |εℓ,i (x)| = o(αℓ). The error is zero when ℓ = L.We next translate the above bound to the required bound on the dynamics of Wℓ. We start by stating uniform bounds required throughout. Since the sample, widths, and activation are fixed, and since we may restrict to scales max m αm ≤ 1, the row-norm condition ∥wj,i ∥ ≤ 2αj implies recursively that 

max  

> μ,j

∥zj (xμ)∥ ≤ K. 

Hence, at the start of layer ℓ,

∥ ˆuℓ∥ ≤ 1

n

X

> μ

|yμ| ∥ zℓ−1(xμ)∥ ≤ K, 

and 

∥ bC(ℓ)∥op ≤ 1

n

X

> μ

|yμ| ∥ zℓ−1(xμ)∥2 ≤ K. 

26 The same bounds give ∥J(0)  

> Lℓ

∥op ≤ K and hence uniformly bounded effective readouts. The residuals rμ are uniformly bounded as well. Therefore ∥∇ wℓ,i L∥ ≤ K. Choose τ small enough that τ K ≤ 1. Then, for every 

t with ηt ≤ τ α ℓ,

∥wℓ,i (t)∥ ≤ ∥ wℓ,i (0) ∥ + ηtK ≤ 2αℓ.

On this horizon, |uℓ,i (xμ)| ≤ Kα ℓ. Taylor’s theorem and Assumption 2 give 

σ′(u) = c0 + c1 u + ωσ(u), |ωσ(u)| ≤ 12 ∥σ′′′ ∥∞u2. (37) Moreover, by (36) , ¯aℓ,i (xμ) = ¯ aℓ,i (1+ εℓ,i (xμ)) with sup μ |εℓ,i (xμ)| = o(αℓ). Thus the readout replacement error is smaller than the leading readout contribution itself; quantitatively it is |¯aℓ,i | o(αℓ) = o(α2 

> ℓ

), because 

|¯aℓ,i | = O(γℓ) = o(αℓ). By the hierarchy of scales, we further have | ˆf (xμ)| = o(α2 

> ℓ

), and rμ = yμ + o(α2 

> ℓ

).Substituting these three estimates in (33) yields 

1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

rμ ¯aℓ,i (xμ) σ′ uℓ,i (xμ) zℓ−1(xμ) = ¯ aℓ,i 

c0 ˆuℓ + c1 bC(ℓ)wℓ,i (t) + Eℓ,i (t),

with the per-step error bound 

∥E ℓ,i (t)∥ ≤ K



|¯aℓ,i | sup 

> μ

|εℓ,i (xμ)| + |¯aℓ,i |α2 

> ℓ

+ o(α2 

> ℓ

)



≤ Kα 2 

> ℓ

.

Finally, wℓ,i (t + 1) − wℓ,i (t) = −η∇wℓ,i L, so setting Rℓ,i (t) := ηEℓ,i (t) proves (30) . Summing over 

0 ≤ s < t ≤ Tℓ gives 

> t−1

X

> s=0

Rℓ,i (s) ≤ ηt Kα 2 

> ℓ

≤ Kα 3 

> ℓ

,

which is (31). 27 B Two-layer networks 

B.1 Training a two-layer network on multi-index models 

In this section, we instantiate the general framework on a canonical setting that has driven much of the recent theory of feature learning: training a two-layer network on a Gaussian multi-index model (e.g. [18, 19, 61, 62, 67–69, 107–110].) The goal of this subsection is to make explicit how the second-order correlation criterion that drives Neural LoFi in the main text reduces, in this setting, to the classical information exponent of [69], and how the regime IE ≤ 2 is precisely the regime in which Neural LoFi alone (i.e., a single low-degree filtering step) suffices for weak recovery of the hidden subspace. This is connected to a recent line of work on the Hessian of the loss in, e.g. [40, 57 –59]. We then describe how, when IE = 2 , the resulting dynamics of the two-layer network under gradient descent take the form of a saddle-to-saddle cascade through the top directions of the population correlation matrix. 

Setting We consider inputs x ∈ Rd with x ∼ N (0 , I d) and a teacher of multi-index form 

y = f ⋆(x) = g⋆ ⟨u⋆

> 1

, x⟩, . . . , ⟨u⋆r , x⟩ + ξ, (38) where U ⋆ = [ u⋆

> 1

, . . . , u⋆r ] ∈ Rd×r has orthonormal columns spanning a hidden subspace V ⋆ ⊂ Rd of dimension r = O(1) , g⋆ : Rr → R is a fixed link function with E[g⋆(Z)2] < ∞ for Z ∼ N (0 , I r), and ξ is independent sub-Gaussian noise. The student is the two-layer network 

ˆf (x) = 1

√p

> p

X

> i=1

ai σ ⟨wi, x⟩, wi ∈ Rd, a i ∈ R, (39) trained by (online or layerwise) gradient descent on the squared loss with small initialization wi(0) ∼N (0 , d −1Id) and second-layer weights ai either fixed at random signs or trained on a fresh batch. This is the standard setup of e.g. [61, 67, 69, 107, 109, 110]. 

From the LoFi correlation criterion to the information exponent Specializing the first-layer ( ℓ = 1 )Neural LoFi criterion of equation (12) to this setting, the input representation is z0(x) = x, and the population version of the second-order correlation maximized by Neural LoFi at layer 1 becomes 

ρ(φ) = E

h

y φ (x)2i

, φ ∈ H 0, ∥φ∥H0 = 1 , (40) where H0 = L2(γd) is the Gaussian RKHS associated with the identity representation reducing to the constraint ∥w∥ = 1 . . Expanding f ⋆ in the Hermite basis, f ⋆(x) = P

> k≥0

⟨f ⋆, H k⟩ Hk(U ⋆⊤x), and any test feature φ in the same basis, the criterion (40) retains only the components of φ2 that overlap with the lowest non-zero Hermite component of f ⋆. Following [69], define the information exponent of f ⋆ as 

IE( f ⋆) := min  k ≥ 1 : E[f ⋆(x) Hk(⟨u, x⟩)] ̸ ≡ 0 for some u ∈ V ⋆ . (41) Our second-order correlation ρ(φ) probes φ2, so it is sensitive to the first two Hermite components. In particular, • if IE( f ⋆) = 1 (linear teacher direction), the maximizer of (40) corresponds to φ linear in x and aligned with the leading direction of E[yx];28 • if IE( f ⋆) = 2 , the maximizer is a quadratic form in x and the criterion reduces to the top-eigenvector problem for the population correlation matrix C⋆ := E[y xx ⊤]−E[y] Id;• if IE( f ⋆) ≥ 3, the second-order correlation is degenerate at the population level on the hidden subspace, and a single LoFi step recovers no signal. This is precisely the well-known threshold separating “easy” from “hard” multi-index problems for online SGD [18, 19, 68, 69]. 

Neural LoFi suffices for weak recovery when IE ≤ 2. Let ˆC(1) = 1

> n

Pnμ=1 yμ xμx⊤ 

> μ

− ¯y I d be the empirical correlation used by Neural LoFi at layer 1, and let bV1 be the top-k1 eigenspace of ˆC(1) . The following statement, which is a direct consequence of matrix concentration results applied to ˆC(1) , makes the link with weak recovery quantitative. 

Proposition 2 (Neural LoFi recovers V ⋆ when IE ≤ 2). Assume the multi-index model (38) with IE( f ⋆) ≤ 2

and bounded link function. There exist constants c, C, δ > 0 depending only on g⋆ such that, with sample size n ≥ C d , the top-r eigenspace bV1 of ˆC(1) satisfies 

PbV1 − PV ⋆ 

> op

≤ 1 − δ, i.e. weak recovery of V ⋆, (42) 

with probability 1 − d−c.

In other words, when IE ≤ 2, a single Neural LoFi layer is statistically sufficient: the same low-degree filtering step that, in the main text, defines the Neural LoFi feature already captures the hidden subspace at the optimal n = Θ( d) sample complexity, in agreement with the upper bounds of [61, 69]. When IE ≥ 3,Proposition 2 fails by construction, and recovery of V ⋆ requires either non-Gaussian preprocessing of y (e.g. polynomial reweightings, as in [19, 62]) or genuinely deeper compositionality, which is the regime studied in Appendix A and the main text. 

Saddle-to-saddle dynamics in the Neural LoFi regime with IE = 2 . We now describe how, under the same multi-index model with IE( f ⋆) = 2 , the actual gradient-descent dynamics of the two-layer network (39) traverse the top directions of C⋆ in a saddle-to-saddle cascade, recovering the same ordered features as Neural LoFi. Order the eigenvalues of C⋆ as λ1 > λ 2 > · · · > λ r > 0 on the hidden subspace and λr+1 = · · · = λd = 0 

off it, with associated eigenvectors v⋆ 

> 1

, . . . , v⋆r . With small initialization ∥wi(0) ∥ ≍ d−1/2 and step-size η,the leading-order continuous-time dynamics of the (rescaled) neuron weights ewi(t) satisfy, after averaging over the second-layer signs, a power-iteration–type ODE driven by C⋆:

˙ewi(t) =  C⋆ − ew⊤ 

> i

C⋆ ewi Id

 ewi(t) + o(1) , (43) Equation (43) is the gradient flow of − ew⊤C⋆ ew on the sphere, whose only attractors are the top eigenvectors 

±v⋆ 

> 1

and whose other critical points are strict saddles indexed by the remaining v⋆j .When several eigenvalues λj are well separated, this gives rise to the saddle-to-saddle picture: starting from a small isotropic initialization, the trajectory spends a time Tj ≍ λ−1 

> j

log( d) in a neighborhood of the saddle associated with v⋆j before escaping along the next leading direction [111]. The neurons therefore learn the directions v⋆ 

> 1

, v⋆ 

> 2

, . . . , v⋆r sequentially , in order of decreasing population correlation λj , with sharp transitions between successive plateaus. The eigenbasis traversed by GD in such saddle-to-saddle dynamics is exactly the basis selected by the Neural LoFi criterion (40) . In both cases, the relevant operator is C⋆ = E[y xx ⊤] (up to centering), and the ordering 29 by λj is the ordering of low-degree correlations with the label. Neural LoFi can thus be viewed as the static abstraction of the saddle-to-saddle GD dynamics in the IE = 2 regime, replacing the dynamics through saddles by a single eigendecomposition of ˆC(1) .Finally, we note that with the use of a different loss other than the squared loss or with data reuse or label transformations [19, 62], the criterion in Equation 40 is modified to: 

ρg(φ) = E

h

g(y) φ(x)2i

, φ ∈ H 0, ∥φ∥H0 = 1 , (44) for a transformation g : R → R. The condition ρg(φ)̸ = 0 then corresponds to generative exponent [60, 62] 

≥ 2 instead of the information exponent [69]. 30 C Vector labels 

In the main text we stated Theorem 2 for scalar labels y ∈ R. The variational criteria extend in a natural way to vector-valued labels y ∈ Rm, as encountered in multi-class classification (e.g. one-hot or softmax targets), multi-task regression, or any problem with a multi-dimensional response. We sketch here the corresponding generalization. 

Per-coordinate correlation operator — Given a feature ψ : X → R and a vector label y = ( y1, . . . , y m),define the label-feature correlation vector 

cn[ψ] :=  bEn[y1 ψ(x)] , . . . , bEn[ym ψ(x)]  ∈ Rm, (45) and analogously the second-order correlation vector c(2)  

> n

[φ] :=  bEn[ya φ(x)2]ma=1 . The scalar quantities 

bEn[y ψ (x)] and bEn[y φ (x)2] used in Theorem 2 are recovered when m = 1 .

Natural scalarization — To obtain a variational principle one needs a scalar score on cn[ψ]. A natural generalization is to use the squared Euclidean norm of the correlation vector, 

Sℓ2 (ψ) := ∥cn[ψ]∥22 =

> d

X

> a=1

 bEn[ya ψ(x)] 2, (46) which selects features that are simultaneously well aligned with as many label coordinates as possible. 

Vector-valued variational characterization — With the above generalization, the analogues of parts (i)– (ii) of Theorem 2 read as follows: (i ′) Linear features. The linear features are defined recursively as: 

ψℓk ∈ arg max   

> ψ:∥ψ∥Hℓ−1=1 ,ψ ⊥ψℓ
> 1,·,ψ ℓk−1

bEn[y ψ(x)] 22, (47) Note that unlike the scalar label setting in Theorem 2, the linear correlation criterion now produces m

features, corresponding to the m singular vectors of the correlation matrix 1

> n

Pnμ=1 yμz⊤

> ℓ−1

(x)

(ii ′) Second-order features. For each k = 1 , . . . , k ℓ,

φk ∈ arg max   

> φ:∥φ∥Hℓ−1=1
> φ⊥φ1,...,φ k−1

bEn[y φ(x)2] 22, (48) successively orthogonalized to the previously selected features. 31 D A Solvable Theoretical Setting 

The agnostic and recursive nature of Neural LoFi calls for a theoretical setting that contains a compositional structure, while not revealing the relevant intermediate variables to the learner. In this appendix, we follow the hierarchical spectral construction of [41], building on the fundamental earlier works [42 – 44]. This allows us to define a controlled high-dimensional model and to use it to study how depth turns a globally hard learning problem into a sequence of simpler spectral recoveries. A natural way to isolate the role of depth is to consider teacher-student models where the target is not merely a low-dimensional function of the input, but is built through a hierarchy of intermediate representations. Such models have appeared in several recent works on compositional learning and the computational advantage of depth, including random hierarchy models, hierarchical Gaussian targets, and polynomial teacher-student constructions (e.g. [21, 22, 25, 26, 41 – 44, 47, 112]). They share the same guiding principle: a target may look high-dimensional or high-degree as a function of the input, while becoming low-degree after the right intermediate representation has been found. This is precisely the situation in which depth should help, since learning can proceed by a sequence of simpler feature-recovery problems rather than by solving the full high-degree task at once. 

D.1 Setting 

We focus on the high-dimensional Gaussian teacher-student model of [41], which provides a particularly tractable instance of this principle. The input is Gaussian, x ∼ N (0 , I d), and the target is generated by a two-level compositional hierarchy 

x ∈ Rd −→ h(1) (x) ∈ Rd1 −→ h(2) (x) ∈ R −→ y. (49) For q ≥ 1, we denote by Hq(·) the normalized Hermite polynomial of order q, either in its scalar or tensor-valued form. 2 We write ⟨· , ·⟩ for the Frobenius product between tensors of the same order. 3 We write Fq for the symmetric flattening map from order-q symmetric tensors to RDq , with Dq =  d+q−1

> q

, chosen so that the Frobenius product is preserved. Below, we freely identify a symmetric tensor with its flattened representation whenever no ambiguity arises. The teacher parameters are given by symmetric tensors 

A(1)  

> i

∈ (Rd)⊗q

> sym

, i = 1 , . . . , d 1, d1 = dϵ, (50) normalized so that the first-layer features have order-one variance, and by a symmetric matrix 

A(2) ∈ Rd1×d1 . (51) The latent variables and the label are then defined as 

h(1)  

> i

(x) = 

D

A(1)  

> i

, H q(x)

E

, i = 1 , . . . , d 1, (52) 

h(2) (x) = 

D

A(2) , H 2(h(1) (x)) 

E

, (53) 

y = g⋆(h(2) (x)) . (54)                                    

> 2For a vector x∈Rm, the tensor Hermite polynomial Hq(x)∈(Rm)⊗q
> sym is defined through the tensorial Rodrigues formula
> √q!Hq(x) = ( −1) qe∥x∥2/2∇⊗q
> x
> 
> e−∥ x∥2/2
> 
> ,where ∇⊗q
> xdenotes the q-fold symmetric tensor of derivatives. For m= 1 , this reduces to the normalized scalar Hermite polynomial √q!Hq(z) = ( −1) qez2/2dq
> dz q
> 
> e−z2/2
> 
> .
> 3For example, if x∈Rmand A∈Rm×mis symmetric, then A, H 2(x)=1√2
> 
> x⊤Ax−Tr( A)
> 
> .

32 Thus the first layer selects only d1 = dϵ directions inside the ambient degree-q Hermite space of dimension 

Dq. When d1 ≪ Dq, the relevant information is sparse in this low-degree feature space: the target depends on x only through a small hidden subspace of Hermite features. Learning the first layer therefore amounts to recovering this subspace, so that the rest of the hierarchy can be expressed as a low-degree problem in the variables h(1) .The analysis of [41] shows that this sparse compositional structure can be exploited by a hierarchical spectral estimator. Rather than learning the full composed function in one step, the procedure first recovers the hidden degree-q subspace defining h(1) , and then uses this recovered representation to make the next component of the hierarchy accessible. In this sense, depth turns the learning problem into a sequence of spectral recovery tasks, each one exposing the variables needed by the next layer. This gives a clean explanation for the advantage of depth in this model. A one-shot method that works directly on the input must resolve the full high-degree dependence of y on x. By contrast, the hierarchical spectral procedure only needs to reveal the first representation and then reuse it to make the next layer visible. In the regime d1 = dϵ, the first stage requires on the order of dq+ϵ samples, while the second stage requires only the sample complexity of a quadratic problem in dimension d1. The dominant cost is therefore the recovery of the first hidden representation, rather than the degree of the full composed polynomial. The price to pay is that the corresponding spectral estimators are still partially co-designed with the Gaussian-Hermite structure of the teacher. Indeed, the first stage is built in an explicit degree-k Hermite feature space, while the second stage uses a prescribed second-order Hermite structure in the recovered variables. A natural way to relax this feature-design aspect is to replace the explicit Hermite construction by nonlinear random features. Rather than specifying the polynomial coordinates in advance, one lets a random feature map generate a generic nonlinear representation and applies the same layer-wise spectral selection in that space. In the hierarchical teacher-student setting above, this random-feature extension of the hierarchical spectral estimator matches precisely the Neural LoFi algorithm. 

D.2 Random-feature hierarchical estimator 

In this setting, Neural LoFi takes the following concrete form. Let W1 = ( w1,a )p1 

> a=1

with w1,a ∼ Unif( Sd−1),and define the first random-feature representation 

ϕ(1)  

> μ

= 1

√p1

σ1(W1xμ) ∈ Rp1 . (55) The first spectral operator is 

bC1 = 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμϕ(1)  

> μ

ϕ(1) ⊤ 

> μ

. (56) Let bV1 ∈ Rp1×d1 contain the eigenvectors of bC1 associated with the largest eigenvalues in absolute value. Here we keep d1 directions for simplicity; this can be replaced by a standard rank-selection step. The recovered first-layer coordinates are 

bh(1)  

> μ

= bV ⊤ 

> 1

ϕ(1)  

> μ

∈ Rd1 . (57) We then draw W2 = ( w2,a )p2 

> a=1

with w2,a ∼ Unif( Sd1−1), and define 

ϕ(2)  

> μ

= 1

√p2

σ2(W2bh(1)  

> μ

) ∈ Rp2 . (58) 33 At the second layer, since the teacher contains only one hidden direction, we do not construct a matrix-valued spectral estimator. Instead, we directly form the first-order moment vector 

bv2 = 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμϕ(2)  

> μ

. (59) The associated second-layer coordinate is then obtained by projection: 

bh(2)  

> μ

= bv⊤ 

> 2

ϕ(2)  

> μ

. (60) Finally, the readout is fitted on the one-dimensional representation {(bh(2)  

> μ

, y μ)}nμ=1 , for instance by ridge regression in a polynomial feature space, 

bg ∈ arg min 

> g∈G

1

n

> n

X

> μ=1



yμ − g(bh(2)  

> μ

)

2

+ λ∥g∥2 

> G

. (61) The choice of keeping exactly d1 eigenvectors at the first layer is not meant to define a different procedure, but simply to make explicit the outcome of the usual rank-selection step within Neural LoFi in the present setting. More generally, one could keep an arbitrary number k of directions and optimize over k, exactly as in the rest of the pipeline. In the model considered here, this optimization would select d1 directions at the first layer and a single direction at the second layer. In that sense, fixing d1 in the first layer and using the linear estimator bv2 in the second layer is fully equivalent to the standard Neural LoFi selection rule. 

D.3 Main Results 

The main prediction of this tractable model is that replacing the explicit Hermite structure of the estimator by random features preserves the emergence transition. In particular, for a degree-q first layer with d1 = dϵ

hidden variables, we expect the first representation h(1) to become recoverable at the sample scale 

n ≫ dq+ϵ. (62) In the quadratic setting used in our experiments, q = 2 , and the predicted first-stage transition is therefore 

n ≫ d2+ ϵ.This prediction is the concrete instance of the emergence criterion in Eq. (18) in the main text. Indeed, Eq. (18) states that the empirical fluctuation level is governed by the effective dimension of the current residual feature class. Section F.2 shows that, before the first hidden variables have been recovered, the relevant effective dimension is the size of the degree-q Hermite block, namely Dq = O(dq). The additional factor d1 = dϵ comes from separating and aligning with the d1 planted directions in this block, giving the scale Dqd1 = O(dq+ϵ).The role of the next subsection is to explain why the random-feature estimator contains the same signal-bearing Hermite spectral object as the explicit construction, now embedded in the random-feature representation. Figure 2 illustrates the resulting transition numerically: in the quadratic case, the drop in MSE, the growth of the overlap with h(1) , and the separation of the leading eigenvalues all occur at the predicted first-layer emergence scale. 34 D.4 Mathematical Justification 

We now analyze the signal structure of the random-feature estimator introduced above. The key point is that, although the estimator is built from generic nonlinear random features, its population signal behaves as a well-defined Hermite estimator aligned with the teacher hierarchy. This will allow us to connect the first step of the Neural LoFi algorithm to the spectral transition established in the Hermite model of [41]. Let us expand the first-layer activation in Hermite as 

σ1(z) = X

> q≥2

cqHq(z), cq = Ez∼N (0 ,1) 

σ1(z)Hq(z) , (63) where Hq denotes the normalized scalar Hermite polynomial of degree q. For each row w1,a of W1, we use the standard Hermite tensor identity 

Hq(⟨w1,a , x⟩) = 

D

w⊗q

> 1,a

, H q(x)

E

. (64) Here and below, w⊗q 

> 1,a

denotes the degree-q Hermite coefficient vector, with the multi-index normalization chosen so that the above identity holds. Collecting these coefficient tensors over all rows of W1, and flattening them with the Frobenius-preserving map F [·], we define: 

1

√p1

Hq(W1x) = PqHq(x), with Pq := 1

√p1



F [w⊗q

> 1,1

]⊤

...

F [w⊗q 

> 1,p 1

]⊤

 ∈ Rp1×Dq . (65) where Hq(W1x) ∈ Rp1 is understood entrywise on the left-hand side and Hq(x) ∈ RDq is the flattened Hermite tensor. Hence the first random-feature representation decomposes as 

ϕ(1)  

> μ

= 1

√p1

σ1(W1xμ) = X

> q≥2

cqPqHq(xμ). (66) We denote by 

bC(q) 

> H

:= 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμHq(xμ)Hq(xμ)⊤ (67) the degree-q Hermite moment matrix appearing in the middle. If one uses the centered second-order Hermite convention of [41], this matrix should be replaced by its centered version; the difference is an empirical isotropic term, controlled by the same estimates and absorbed in the rates below. With this notation, the degree-q contribution to the first Neural LoFi operator is 

bC(q)RF = c2 

> q

Pq bC(q) 

> H

P ⊤ 

> q

. (68) Thus the random-feature operator contains the Hermite estimator conjugated by the random Hermite embed-ding Pq, up to the scalar factor c2 

> q

.We now focus on the quadratic case q = 2 , which is the case controlled explicitly by the quadratic Hermite decomposition of [113]. Define the normalized RF Gram 

G2 := D2P ⊤ 

> 2

P2. (69) 35 The important point is that G2 is not close to the identity on the full degree-2 Hermite space. The trace direction produces a deterministic contraction spike. More precisely, by Lemma F.6 and Corollary F.7 of [113], one has the decomposition 

G2 = ID2 + K2 + R2, K2 = θdee ⊤, |θd| ≤ eO(d), (70) where e ∈ RD2 is the normalized trace direction in the degree-2 Hermite block. The term K2 is the explicit non-trivial contraction term coming from the trace component of the quadratic Hermite features, while R2 is the remaining centered fluctuation of the random-feature Gram, with 

∥R2∥op ≤ eO

s

D2

p1

+ D2

p1

 , (71) where the eO(·) hides logarithmic factors in d. This conservative full-column concentration bound is not expected to be optimal, but it is sufficient for the projected comparison below. Finally, let A(1) ∈ Rd1×D2 be the matrix of planted first-layer Hermite directions, and define its random-feature image by 

A(1) RF := pD2 A(1) P ⊤ 

> 2

∈ Rd1×p1 . (72) We can now state the projected RF analogue of Theorem 3.1 in [41]. 

Theorem 3 (Projected RF Hermite recovery, quadratic case) . Assume the setting and normalization of Theorem 3.1 in [41], with d1 = dε and ε < 1/2. With G2, K2, R2 as defined above, the following holds with high probability: 

pd1

D2

c22

A(1) RF bC(2) RF A(1) ⊤ 

> RF

− ν1A(2) 

> op

≤ eO

r d2d1

n

!

+ eO

 d1

√d



+ eO

 1

√d1



+ eO

d1

r d1

n + d21

d2 + pd1

s

D2

p1

+ D2

p1

1 + 

s

D2

p1

+ D2

p1

 . (73) 

In particular, if 

n ≫ d2d1, p1 ≫ pd1d2,

then the additional RF bridge error is o(1) . Therefore the projected RF estimator has the same limiting signal as the Hermite estimator, up to the deterministic scalar factor c22/D 2.Proof. The proof is a direct comparison with the Hermite estimator. By the definitions of A(1) RF , bC(2) RF , and G2,we have the exact identity 

D2

c22

A(1) RF bC(2) RF A(1) ⊤ 

> RF

= A(1) G2 bC(2)  

> H

G2A(1) ⊤. (74) Thus it is enough to compare A(1) G2 bC(2)  

> H

G2A(1) ⊤ with A(1) bC(2)  

> H

A(1) ⊤.36 We use the RF Gram decomposition stated above, 

G2 = ID2 + K2 + R2, K2 = θdee ⊤, |θd| ≤ eO(d), ∥R2∥op ≤ eO

s

D2

p1

+ D2

p1

 .

Here K2 is the trace-contraction spike and R2 is the centered RF Gram remainder. Let C := bC(2)  

> H

. We use the following standard high-probability bounds: 

∥A(1) e∥2 ≤ eO

√d1

d

!

, (75) 

∥C∥op ≤ eO

 1

√d1



, (76) 

∥e⊤CA (1) ⊤∥2 ≤ eO

r d1

n + 1

d

!

, (77) 

|e⊤Ce | ≤ eO 1

√n +

√d1

d2

!

. (78) The first estimate is the overlap of a random d1-dimensional Gaussian subspace with the fixed trace direction. The remaining estimates are obtained by the same truncation, matrix Bernstein, and Gaussian-equivalence arguments used in Appendix A.4 of [41], applied either with one test tensor equal to the trace direction e, or with both test tensors equal to e. The population contributions are smaller because the trace overlap satisfies 

∥A(1) e∥2 = eO(√d1/d ).Expanding G2 = I + K2 + R2 gives 

G2CG 2 − C = K2C + CK 2 + K2CK 2 + terms containing R2.

For the first trace term, 

A(1) K2CA (1) ⊤ = θd(A(1) e)( e⊤CA (1) ⊤),

and therefore, using (75)–(77), 

pd1∥A(1) K2CA (1) ⊤∥op ≤ eO d1

r d1

n + d1

d

!

.

The transpose term A(1) CK 2A(1) ⊤ is bounded identically. For the quadratic trace term, 

A(1) K2CK 2A(1) ⊤ = θ2

> d

(A(1) e)( e⊤Ce )( A(1) e)⊤,

so by (75) and (78), 

pd1∥A(1) K2CK 2A(1) ⊤∥op ≤ eO d1

r d1

n + d21

d2

!

.

Finally, all terms containing R2 are controlled by ∥R2∥op and (76) . The worst mixed terms are K2CR 2 and 

R2CK 2, and they satisfy 

pd1∥A(1) K2CR 2A(1) ⊤∥op ≤ eO

pd1

s

D2

p1

+ D2

p1

 ,

37 with the same bound for the transpose. The R2CR 2 term contributes at most 

eO

pd1

s

D2

p1

+ D2

p1



> 2

 .

Combining these estimates gives the bridge bound 

pd1 A(1) (G2CG 2 − C) A(1) ⊤ 

> op

≤ eO d1

r d1

n + d1

d + d21

d2

!

+ eO

pd1

s

D2

p1

+ D2

p1

1 + 

s

D2

p1

+ D2

p1

 . (79) Theorem 3.1 of [41] gives 

pd1 A(1) bC(2)  

> H

A(1) ⊤ − ν1A(2)  

> op

≤ eO

r d2d1

n

!

+ eO

 d1

√d



+ eO

 1

√d1



.

Combining this with (79) proves (73). We stated the theorem for the quadratic case q = 2 because the contraction correction is completely explicit. For any fixed degree q, the same argument applies by replacing the trace direction by the finite list of lower contraction sectors given by the Gegenbauer decomposition; see Lemma F.8 of [113]. These contraction terms are subleading on the random planted subspace by the same vanishing-contraction estimates used in Appendix A.1–A.4 of [41]. Consequently, the Hermite recovery theorem transfers to the degree-q RF estimator with the same sample scaling. Together with the RF Gram concentration requirement, the sufficient scaling for recovery is 

n ≫ Dqd1, p1 ≫ Dq, (80) up to logarithmic factors. Under these conditions, the degree-q RF estimator has the same projected signal limit as the Hermite estimator, up to the scalar factor c2 

> q

/D q.The projected comparison above shows that the first LoFi step has the same signal scaling as the explicit Hermite estimator. Therefore, the bottleneck remains the Hermite recovery scale of the first layer, together with the RF width needed to realize the corresponding degree-q block. The same reasoning applies recursively to later LoFi steps, with the ambient dimension replaced by the dimension of the representation entering that layer. 

D.5 Numerical experiments 

We begin by defining the two observables reported in the random-feature experiments. Given a fresh test set 

{(xμ, y μ)}ntest  

> μ=1

, we measure the prediction error through the test mean-squared error 

MSE test = 1

ntest 

> ntest

X

> μ=1

 ˆyμ − yμ

2, (81) 38 and we quantify the recovery of the first hidden layer through the feature overlap 

Overlap( h(1) , bh(1) ) = H(1) ˆH(1) ⊤ 2 

> F

, H(1) =  h(1) 

> μ

 

> μ≤ntest

, ˆH(1) =  ˆh(1) 

> μ

 

> μ≤ntest

. (82) All curves are averaged over 10 seeds, and error bars indicate one standard deviation. Concerning the precise setting of the experiments, we specialize to the quadratic first-layer setting q = 2 . Unless otherwise stated, we fix 

d1 = ⌊dϵ⌋, ϵ = 12 , n = ⌊dα⌋, (83) and generate labels according to 

y = g⋆(h(2) (x)) , g⋆(t) = tanh( t). (84) The purpose of these experiments is to test whether the random-feature pipeline exhibits the same first-layer emergence transition as the explicit Hermite spectral estimator, while replacing the structured Hermite features by generic nonlinear random features. The random-feature maps used by the learner are chosen independently of the teacher. The rows of the random matrices are sampled uniformly on the sphere, 

w1,a ∼ Unif( Sd−1), w2,a ∼ Unif( Sd1−1), (85) as in the estimator of Section D.2. For both layers, we use a ReLU activation with its degree-zero and degree-one Hermite components removed: 

σ⊥{ 0,1}(z) = ReLU( z) − c0H0(z) − c1H1(z), cr = EG∼N (0 ,1) 

ReLU( G)Hr(G) . (86) The random-feature widths are chosen in the overcomplete regime relative to the quadratic Hermite block, 

p1 ≳ D2, D2 =

d + 1 2



, (87) in agreement with the finite-width requirement appearing in Theorem 3. In the second layer, the width p2

is chosen large enough with an equivalent regime as for the first layer, p2 ≥ d21, with the same activation 

σ⊥{ 0,1} at both layers. For each value of d and α, we generate a training set of size n = ⌊dα⌋ and an independent test set. We follow the Neural LoFi learning strategy detailed in Sec. D.2, adding only batch normalization to smooth the anisotropy. The readout bg is fitted by ridge regression on degree-5 polynomial features of bh(2) , with regularization parameter obtained by cross-validation. We additionally apply the same output calibration procedure throughout all experiments. Figure 2 shows that the random-feature estimator undergoes a clear transition near the predicted first-layer scale. For small α, the test MSE remains close to its baseline value and the overlap with h(1) is essentially zero, indicating that the first hidden representation is not yet spectrally accessible. Around the predicted scale n ≫ d2+ ϵ, the MSE drops and the representation overlap grows sharply. This confirms that the improvement in prediction is tied to the recovery of the first hidden representation, rather than merely to the final one-dimensional regression step. Figure 7 gives a more direct spectral view of the same phenomenon. At small sample sizes, the leading eigenvalues of bC1 remain buried in the random-feature bulk. As α increases, the leading d1 eigenvalues separate from the bulk and become stable outliers. This outlier formation is the spectral signature of the first-layer signal emerging in the random-feature representation. Together with the overlap curve, it shows that Neural LoFi recovers the hidden degree-2 representation at the same sample scale predicted by the Hermite theory, while avoiding the explicit construction of the Hermite feature map. 39 -2.5 0 2.5 

Eigenvalue 

> 10 ¡2
> 10 0
> 10 2
> Density

® = 1 :5  

> -0.8 00.8

Eigenvalue 

® = 2 :0  

> -0.3 00.3

Eigenvalue 

® = 2 :5  

> -0.2 00.2

Eigenvalue 

® = 3 :0  

> -0.2 00.2

Eigenvalue 

® = 3 :5Figure 7: Spectral emergence in the Neural LoFi estimator. Spectrum of the first random-feature spectral operator                 

> bC1for the hierarchical solvable model of section 4.1, shown at increasing sample exponents α= log( n)/log( d). Blue histograms display the bulk eigenvalue density, while red triangles indicate the leading d1eigenvalues in absolute value. As αincreases, the leading eigenvalues progressively separate from the bulk, marking the emergence of concepts in the first layer, as predicted by the sample-complexity scale n≫d2+ ϵ(from Eq. (17)) in the quadratic setting k= 2 .

# E Neural LoFi Kernel 

E.1 Preliminaries: RKHS, spectral theorem and kernel integral operators 

This subsection collects the standard background on Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS) and the spectral decomposition of kernel integral operators that we use in the rest of the appendix. We refer to [28,29] for a more detailed exposition. Throughout, (X , μ ) denotes a measurable input space equipped with a finite Borel measure μ (e.g. the data distribution), and K : X × X → R a symmetric kernel. 

Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space A Hilbert space H of real-valued functions on X is a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) if, for every x ∈ X , the evaluation functional ev x : f 7 → f (x) is bounded (continuous) on H. By the Riesz representation theorem, there exists a unique element Kx ∈ H such that 

f (x) = ⟨f, K x⟩H for all f ∈ H . (88) Defining K(x, x′) := ⟨Kx, K x′ ⟩H = Kx′ (x) yields a symmetric positive semi-definite kernel, and (88) is called the reproducing property because the kernel section Kx = K(x, ·) literally reproduces the value of f

at x via an inner product. Conversely, by the Moore–Aronszajn theorem [114], every symmetric positive semi-definite kernel K uniquely determines an RKHS HK in which (88) holds; concretely, HK is obtained by completing span {K(x, ·) : x ∈ X } under the inner product ⟨K(x, ·), K (x′, ·)⟩HK = K(x, x′).

Spectral theorem for compact self-adjoint operators Let H be a separable Hilbert space and T : H → H 

a bounded linear operator. Recall that T is self-adjoint if ⟨T f, g ⟩ = ⟨f, T g ⟩, and compact if it maps bounded sets to relatively compact sets (equivalently, it is a norm-limit of finite-rank operators). The spectral theorem states: 

Theorem 4 (Hilbert–Schmidt spectral theorem) . If T is compact and self-adjoint on a separable Hilbert space 

H, then there exist a (finite or countable) sequence of real eigenvalues {λi}i≥1 with |λ1| ≥ | λ2| ≥ · · · → 0

and an orthonormal system {ei}i≥1 ⊂ H of eigenvectors T e i = λiei such that 

T f = X

> i≥1

λi ⟨f, e i⟩ ei for all f ∈ H . (89) Trace-class and Hilbert–Schmidt operators are special cases of compact operators on which the spectrum is, respectively, absolutely summable ( P 

> i

|λi| < ∞) and square-summable ( P 

> i

λ2 

> i

< ∞). 40 Kernel integral operator Given a kernel K and the measure μ, the associated integral operator TK :

L2(X , μ ) → L2(X , μ ) is defined by 

(TK f )( x) := 

Z

> X

K(x, x′) f (x′) dμ (x′). (90) Under the standard assumptions that K is symmetric, continuous (or merely measurable) and square-integrable in the sense that R 

> X ×X

K(x, x′)2 dμ (x)dμ (x′) < ∞, the operator TK is self-adjoint and Hilbert–Schmidt (in particular compact) on L2(X , μ ).Applying Theorem 4 to TK yields eigenpairs {(λi, e i)}i≥1 with λi ≥ 0, λi ↓ 0, and {ei} orthonormal in 

L2(X , μ ). Mercer’s theorem [115] then states that, under mild continuity assumptions on X and K (e.g. X

compact and K continuous), the kernel itself admits the absolutely and uniformly convergent expansion 

K(x, x′) = X

> i≥1

λi ei(x) ei(x′). (91) 

Relation between the integral operator and the RKHS The Mercer decomposition (91) provides an explicit isometric description of the RKHS HK in terms of the spectral data of TK . Restricting to indices with λi > 0,

HK =

n

f = X

> i:λi>0

ai ei : ∥f ∥2 

> HK

:= X

> i:λi>0

a2

> i

λi

< ∞

o

, (92) with inner product ⟨f, g ⟩HK = P 

> i

aibi/λ i. Equivalently, HK is the image of L2(X , μ ) under the square root T 1/2 

> K

, with norm ∥T 1/2 

> K

g∥HK = ∥g∥L2(X ,μ ) (modulo ker TK ); equivalently, T 1/2 

> K

: L2(X , μ ) → H K is a partial isometry. Two consequences will be used repeatedly below: • The eigenfunctions {√λi ei}i:λi>0 form an orthonormal basis of HK , while {ei} form an orthonormal basis of the closure of range( TK ) in L2(X , μ ).• Smoothness in HK corresponds to spectral concentration: f ∈ H K iff its L2 coefficients ai = ⟨f, e i⟩L2

decay fast enough that P 

> i

a2 

> i

/λ i < ∞. In particular, functions in the top-k eigenspace of TK are exactly the “low-degree” or “low-frequency” functions used throughout the main text. This dictionary between the kernel K, the integral operator TK and the RKHS HK is what allows us, in the rest of this appendix, to translate between function-space statements (norms, projections, low-degree truncation in HK ) and operator-spectral statements (eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of TK ). 

E.2 Representer Property 

We begin by establishing a fundamental property: the optimal features lie in the finite-dimensional span of training features, which enables efficient computation via the kernel trick. 

Lemma 1 (Representer property of LoFi features) . Let {ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

}kℓ 

> j=1

denote any minimizers of the empirical objective in (8) . Then the corresponding weight vectors {ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

}kℓ 

> j=1

lie in the span of the previous-layer features evaluated at the training inputs, i.e. 

ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

∈ span zℓ−1(x1), . . . , zℓ−1(xn) , j = 1 , . . . , k ℓ. (93) 

Proof of Lemma 1. Fix any index j ∈ { 1, . . . , k ℓ}. The empirical objective in (8) depends on ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

only through the inner products ⟨ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

, zℓ−1(xμ)⟩, μ = 1 , . . . , n , and is optimized subject to the norm constraint 41 ∥ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

∥2 = 1 (together with the deflation/orthogonality constraints to previously selected directions, which are also expressible solely through such inner products). Decompose ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

= v∥ 

> j

+ v⊥ 

> j

, where v∥ 

> j

is the orthogonal projection onto the finite-dimensional subspace S := span {zℓ−1(xμ)}nμ=1 ⊂ Rpℓ−1 and v⊥ 

> j

∈ S ⊥. By orthogonality, ⟨v⊥ 

> j

, zℓ−1(xμ)⟩ = 0 for every training input, so ⟨ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

, zℓ−1(xμ)⟩ = ⟨v∥ 

> j

, zℓ−1(xμ)⟩, i.e. the data-dependent objective depends only on v∥ 

> j

. Pythagoras gives 1 = ∥ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

∥22 = ∥v∥ 

> j

∥22 + ∥v⊥ 

> j

∥22, so any nonzero v⊥ 

> j

forces ∥v∥ 

> j

∥2 < 1. The rescaled vector ˜vj := v∥ 

> j

/∥v∥ 

> j

∥2 ∈ S is then feasible (it has unit norm and inherits the orthogonality constraints, since these involve only inner products with vectors in S) and yields a strictly larger objective by a factor ∥v∥ 

> j

∥−22 > 1, contradicting optimality of ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

. Hence every minimizer satisfies v⊥ 

> j

= 0 , i.e. ˆv(ℓ) 

> j

∈ S , which is (93). 

E.3 RKHS-Euclidean Equivalence 

We now establish a fundamental result that underlies all subsequent proofs in this section. By Lemma 1, we know features lie in the span of training features. This allows us to identify RKHS constraints with Euclidean constraints on weight vectors. 

Lemma 2 (RKHS-Euclidean Norm Equivalence) . Let Kℓ−1(x, x′) = ⟨zℓ−1(x), zℓ−1(x′)⟩ and let Hℓ−1 be its induced RKHS. Then the RKHS norm of a linear feature coincides with the Euclidean norm of its weight vector: for any u ∈ Rpℓ−1 , the linear feature 

φu(x) := ⟨u, zℓ−1(x)⟩.

satisfies 

∥φu∥Hℓ−1 = ∥u∥2.

Consequently, the RKHS unit ball {φ : ∥φ∥Hℓ−1 ≤ 1} and the Euclidean unit sphere {u : ∥u∥2 = 1 } are in bijection through u 7 → φu, establishing a primal–dual equivalence between RKHS constraints and Euclidean constraints. 

E.4 Proof of Theorem 1 

We prove each part of Theorem 1 in turn, using Lemma 2 to convert between the RKHS and Euclidean formulations. 

Proof of part (i). By Lemma 2, the objective equals 

bEn

y ψ (x) = 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμ⟨u, zℓ−1(xμ)⟩ =

D

u, ˆuℓE

,

where ˆuℓ = 1

> n

Pnμ=1 yμzℓ−1(xμ) is the empirical first-order moment computed in Algorithm 1. By the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality this is maximized at u = ˆ uℓ/∥ ˆuℓ∥2, giving ψℓ(x) = ⟨ ˆuℓ, zℓ−1(x)⟩ as the unique maximizer (up to sign). 

Proof of part (ii). By Lemma 2, the second-order objective equals 

bEn

y φ (x)2 = 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμ⟨u, zℓ−1(xμ)⟩2 = u⊤ bC(ℓ)u ,

42 where bC(ℓ) = 1

> n

Pnμ=1 yμ zℓ−1(xμ)zℓ−1(xμ)⊤ is the empirical second-order moment operator. By the Courant–Fischer minimax theorem, the unit-norm vector maximizing |u⊤ bC(ℓ)u| is the leading eigenvector 

ˆv(ℓ)1 of bC(ℓ) (in absolute eigenvalue). Successive orthogonal maximizers are the subsequent eigenvectors 

ˆv(ℓ)2 , . . . , ˆv(ℓ) 

> kℓ

. Via u 7 → φu, these correspond exactly to φ1, . . . , φ kℓ satisfying the stated variational recursion. 

Dual (kernel-space) form — By Lemma 1, any optimal feature φj lies in the span of the n training feature vectors: 

φj (x) = 

> n

X

> μ=1

αj,μ Kℓ−1(x, xμ). (94) Define αj = ( αj, 1, . . . , α j,n )⊤ as the coefficient vector for feature j. By Lemma 2, the RKHS norm of this feature is 

∥φj ∥2 

> Hℓ−1

= α⊤ 

> j

Gℓ−1αj , (95) where Gℓ−1 = Zℓ−1Z⊤ 

> ℓ−1

∈ Rn×n is the Gram matrix with entries Gℓ−1(μ, ν ) = Kℓ−1(xμ, xν ).The empirical objective from Theorem 1 (ii) becomes 

max  

> α:∥φ∥Hℓ−1=1

1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμφ(xμ)2 = max 

> α:α⊤Gℓ−1α=1

α⊤ bC(ℓ)α , (96) where bC(ℓ) = 1

> n

Pnμ=1 yμKℓ−1(xμ, ·) ⊗ Kℓ−1(xμ, ·) is the label-weighted kernel outer-product operator. 

Proposition 3 (Generalized Eigenvector Problem) . The optimal dual coefficients { ˆαj }kℓ 

> j=1

that sequentially maximize the above constrained objective satisfy the generalized eigenvector problem 

G1/2 

> ℓ−1

Y G 1/2 

> ℓ−1

αj = λj αj , j = 1 , . . . , k ℓ, (97) 

where Y = diag( y1, . . . , y n) is the label matrix, and λj are the generalized eigenvalues ordered by magni-tude. The solutions { ˆαj }kℓ 

> j=1

recover the dual coefficients of the second-order features, enabling a kernel implementation of Neural LoFi without explicit access to the feature vectors. 

Proof of part (iii). At every layer, assume that the limiting eigenvalue (or eigenvalue cluster) being selected is separated from the rest of the spectrum. For a single feature this means a positive eigengap; for a cluster the statements below hold for the spectral projector, with an arbitrary orthonormal basis chosen inside the limiting eigenspace. 

Induction statement. Let ρx be the data distribution. After layer r, let 

g(p) 

> r

(x) =  ψ(p) 

> r

(x), φ (p) 

> r, 1

(x), . . . , φ (p) 

> r,k r

(x)

denote the projected features selected by Neural LoFi at finite width, and let K(p) 

> r

be the kernel produced by the following random lift. The induction claim Ir is that there exist deterministic functions g∞ 

> r

and a deterministic kernel K∞ 

> r

such that 

∥g(p) 

> r

− g∞ 

> r

∥L2(ρx)

> P

−−−→ 

> p→∞

0 (98) 43 and, for the training inputs, 

∥G(p) 

> r

− G∞ 

> r

∥op P

−−−→ 

> p→∞

0,

> n

X

> μ=1

∥K(p) 

> r

(·, xμ) − K∞ 

> r

(·, xμ)∥2

> L2(ρx)
> P

−−−→ 

> p→∞

0, (99) where (G(p) 

> r

)μν = K(p) 

> r

(xμ, xν ). The base case is deterministic: g0(x) = x and K0(x, x′) = ⟨x, x′⟩.We first record the kernel-propagation step used in the induction. Suppose that, for some layer r, the projected features already satisfy g(p) 

> r

→ g∞ 

> r

in L2(ρx). For a deterministic feature map g, write 

Kr[g]( x, x′) = Ea∼πr

σ(a⊤g(x)) σ(a⊤g(x′)) .

The limiting next-layer kernel is K∞ 

> r

= Kr[g∞ 

> r

]. Since g(p) 

> r

→ g∞ 

> r

in L2 and σ is pseudo-Lipschitz with the required moment bounds, dominated convergence gives convergence of the deterministic kernels 

Kr[g(p) 

> r

] → K r[g∞ 

> r

] on the fixed Gram matrix and in the L2 section norm in (99) . Conditional on g(p) 

> r

, the finite-width kernel is an average of iid random features: 

K(p) 

> r

(x, x′) = 1

prprX

> i=1

σ(a⊤ 

> i

g(p) 

> r

(x)) σ(a⊤ 

> i

g(p) 

> r

(x′)) .

For each fixed anchor xμ,

Ea K(p) 

> r

(·, xμ) − K r[g(p) 

> r

]( ·, xμ) 2 

> L2(ρx)

≤ Cμ

pr

, (100) and the same iid law of large numbers applies to the finitely many Gram entries. Thus (99) follows. This is the formal sense in which, once the features entering a layer have a deterministic limit, the next layer sees a fixed deterministic distribution. It remains to show that this deterministic kernel convergence propagates through the spectral filtering step. Assume Iℓ−1 and abbreviate Kp = K(p)

> ℓ−1

, K∞ = K∞

> ℓ−1

, and Gp, G∞ for their Gram matrices. By (99), 

∥Gp − G∞∥op P

−−−→ 

> p→∞

0,

> n

X

> μ=1

∥Kp(·, xμ) − K∞(·, xμ)∥2

> L2(ρx)
> P

−−−→ 

> p→∞

0. (101) The explicit OP (n/ √p) Gram-matrix rate in the non-adaptive, fixed-g case is the usual random-feature concentration bound; for the section convergence, (100) gives the sharper Hilbert-space law of large numbers needed for out-of-sample features. By Lemma 1, every selected feature has the form 

φ(x) = 

> n

X

> μ=1

αμKp(x, xμ).

Its RKHS norm and empirical second-order objective are 

∥φ∥2 

> Hp

= α⊤Gpα, bEn[yφ (x)2] = 1

n α⊤GpY Gpα, Y = diag( y1, . . . , y n).

Therefore, on the range of Gp, the generalized eigenproblem is equivalently the symmetric eigenproblem 

Bpβ = λβ, Bp = 1

n G1/2 

> p

Y G1/2 

> p

, β = G1/2 

> p

α. (102) 44 The square-root map is continuous on positive semidefinite matrices, hence ∥Bp − B∞∥op → 0 in probability. If the kth limiting eigenvalue is isolated with gap ∆k > 0, the Davis–Kahan sin Θ theorem [116] implies convergence of the corresponding projectors at rate OP (∥Bp − B∞∥op /∆k). For a simple eigenvalue, after fixing the sign, 

βp,k P

−−−→ 

> p→∞

β∞,k . (103) We next convert the convergence of βp,k into convergence of the actual feature functions. Let 

kp(x) =  Kp(x, x1), . . . , K p(x, xn)⊤, αp,k = G†/2 

> p

βp,k ,

where † denotes the Moore–Penrose inverse on the stable range of the limiting Gram matrix. If G∞ is nonsingular, this is the ordinary inverse square root. Continuity of the pseudo-inverse operator and (103) give 

αp,k → α∞,k in probability. Hence, with 

bφp,k (x) = kp(x)⊤αp,k , ϕ∞ 

> k

(x) = k∞(x)⊤α∞,k ,

we have ∥ bφp,k − ϕ∞ 

> k

∥L2(ρx) ≤ ∥ kp − k∞∥L2(ρx;Rn) ∥αp,k ∥2

+ ∥k∞∥L2(ρx;Rn) ∥αp,k − α∞,k ∥2 P

−−−→ 

> p→∞

0. (104) The linear feature satisfies the same conclusion directly, since 

ψℓp(x) = 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμKp(x, xμ) → 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1

yμK∞(x, xμ) = ψℓ

> ∞

(x)

in L2(ρx). Thus the whole projected vector g(p) 

> ℓ

= ( ψℓp, bφp, 1, . . . , bφp,k ℓ ) converges to the deterministic vector g∞ 

> ℓ

in L2. Applying the first part of the induction to this deterministic limit gives convergence of the next random feature kernel K(p) 

> ℓ

to 

K∞ 

> ℓ

(x, x′) = Ea∼πℓ

h

σ(a⊤g∞ 

> ℓ

(x)) σ(a⊤g∞ 

> ℓ

(x′)) 

i

,

which proves Iℓ. By induction, all finite collections of learned features and the induced kernels converge layer by layer to deterministic infinite-width limits. 45 F Effective dimension and sample complexity of emergence 

As discussed in the main text, training dynamics is found in practice to often display long plateaus followed by abrupt transitions, with new directions in representation space emerging sequentially [30 – 33]. We return in this section to the emergence of learned features at each layer, and in particular, we now make the noise level 

τ kℓ (n) in (17) explicit. Throughout the section our results apply conditioned on a fixed kernel Kℓ−1(x, x′)

defined by the features zℓ−1 of the previous layers. Recall the residual candidate class 

Sℓk =

n

φ ∈ H ℓ−1 : ∥φ∥Hℓ−1 = 1 , φ ⊥ φ1, · · · , φ k−1

o

.

Let Tℓ−1 : L2(Px) → L2(Px) be the integral operator of the current kernel, 

(Tℓ−1f )( x) = 

Z

Kℓ−1(x, x′)f (x′) dP x(x′),

and let Π⊥ 

> k

denote the projection orthogonal to the selected features φ1, . . . , φ k−1. The residual covariance operator is 

Tℓ,k := Π ⊥ 

> k

Tℓ−1Π⊥ 

> k

.

For a resolution parameter r > 0, define the residual effective dimension :

Definition 1 (Residual effective dimension) . Let {λℓ,k j }j≥1 denote the eigenvalues of Tℓ,k . The effective residual dimension at scale r is defined as 

Dℓk(r) := Tr 

h

Tℓ,k (Tℓ,k + rI )−1i

= X

> j≥1

λℓ,k j

λℓ,k j + r , (105) The above notion of effective dimension is standard in kernel regression [38,39], and similar quantities appear in local Rademacher analyses of kernel classes [36, 37]. Dℓk(r) can be interpreted as counting the number of residual directions whose variance is above the resolution r.

Assumption 3 (Residual eigenfunction hypercontractivity) . Let Eℓ,k denote the L2(Px)-closed span of the residual eigenfunctions {ϕℓ,k j }j≥1. There exists Hℓ < ∞ such that every g ∈ E ℓ,k satisfies 

∥g∥L4(Px) ≤ Hℓ∥g∥L2(Px) .

Equivalently, the same inequality holds for every L2-convergent expansion g = P 

> j

cj ϕℓ,k j with P 

> j

c2 

> j

< ∞.

Such an assumption holds, in particular, for the polynomial eigenbases that appear in random-feature kernels such as Hermite polynomials and spherical harmonics ( [102]). 

Theorem 5 (Emergence sample complexity) . Suppose that Assumption 3 holds and the kernel Kℓ−1 and labels y are uniformly bounded. Let 

rk,⋆ ℓ := arg max  

> r:r≤λℓ,k
> 1

r

q

Dℓk(r).

Here λℓ,k  

> 1

is the top residual eigenvalue, hence the largest possible variance scale of a unit-RKHS candidate in Sℓk. Then, for any δ > 0, there is a constant eCℓ,H > 0 such that with probability at least 1 − δ,

τ kℓ (n) := sup 

> φ∈S ℓk

bcℓ,n (φ) − cℓ(φ) ≤ eCℓ,H rk,⋆ ℓ

s

Dℓk(rk,⋆ ℓ )

n . (106) 46 This gives, up to polylogarithmic factors, the sample scale 

nk ≳ (r(k) 

> ℓ

)2Dℓk(r(k) 

> ℓ

)(ρ(k) 

> ℓ

)2 ,

for recovery of φk conditional on the recovery of previous features φ1, · · · , φ k−1.

Remark 2. The order of maximizers of the noise scale r

q

Dℓk(r) may not perfectly match the order of maximizers of the population correlation E[yφ (x)2] . Hence, the next emergent feature after recovering 

φ1, · · · , φ k−1 may not be φk. For simplicity, we neglect the correction in sample complexity due to such order switches. Proof. For r > 0, let 

Sℓk(r) := {φ ∈ S ℓk : E[φ(X)2] ≤ r},

We proceed by decomposing the fluctuations into contributions from Sℓk(r) for different variance scales r.Define 

τ kℓ (r, n ) := sup  

> φ∈S ℓk(r)

ˆE[yφ 2] − E[yφ 2] . (107) We will show that: 

τ kℓ (r, n ) ≲ eCℓ,H r

s

Dℓk(r)

n (108) The above bound follows through an extension of Theorem 2.1 in [36] which bounds the rademacher complexity of Sℓk(r). Concretely, Theorem 2.1 in [36] provides that for a unit ball of an RKHS of a bounded kernel with eigenvalues {λj }j≥1:

ERn

n

f ∈ H : ∥f ∥H ≤ 1, Ef (X)2 ≤ r

o

≲

 1

n

X

> j≥1

min {r, λ j }



> 1/2

.

Since for every r > 0 and every eigenvalue λj ,

12 min {r, λ j } ≤ rλ j

r + λj

≤ min {r, λ j },

the same bound holds for Dℓk(r) defined in Definition 1. We now adapt the proof of Theorem 2.1 of [36] to the quadratic process. By the boundedness of the labels y,

τ kℓ (r, n ) can be bounded up to constants by the rademacher complexity of φ2 over Sℓk(r), defined as: 

Eϵ[ sup  

> φ∈S ℓk(r)
> n

X

> i=1

ϵiφ(Xi)2 ], (109) where ϵ ∈ {± 1} denote standard rademacher random variables. Let {ϕℓ,k j }j≥1 denote the L2(Px)-orthonormal eigenfunctions of Tℓ,k Any φ with ∥φ∥H = 1 can be expressed in the basis w.r.t {ϕℓ,k j }j≥1 as 

φβ (x) = X

> j≥1

βj

q

λℓ,k j ϕℓ,k j (x), X

> j

β2 

> j

≤ 1.

47 The constraint E[φ(X)2] ≤ r then translates to P 

> j

λℓ,k j β2 

> j

≤ r. Hence, the set of coefficients for φ ∈ Sℓk(r)

is given by: 

Ir := 

β : X

> j

β2 

> j

≤ 1, X

> j

λℓ,k j β2 

> j

≤ r

 .

The proof of Theorem 2.1 in [36] relates the set Ir to an ellipsoid Br through the following inclusions: 

Br ⊂ Ir ⊂ √2 Br, Br := 

β : X

> j

μj (r)β2 

> j

≤ 1

 , μj (r) = 



min {1, r/λ ℓ,k j }

−1

.

Thus the supremum over Ir is bounded, up to an absolute constant, by the supremum over Br. Setting 

θj = pμj (r) βj , Br is re-parameterized as the Euclidean unit ball ∥θ∥2 ≤ 1. Next, define 

aj (r) := λℓ,k j

μj (r) = min {λℓ,k j , r }

The decomposition φβ (x) = P 

> j≥1

βj

q

λℓ,k j ϕℓ,k j (x) can then be re-expressed as: 

X

> j≥1

βj

q

λℓ,k j ϕℓ,k j (x)= X

> j

q

μj (r) βj

1

pμj (r) ϕℓ,k j (x)= X

> j

θj

q

aj (r)ϕℓ,k j (x)sup 

> β∈Ir
> n

X

> i=1

ϵiφβ (Xi)2 ≲ sup 

> ∥θ∥2≤1
> n

X

> i=1

ϵi

X

> j

θj

q

aj (r)ϕℓ,k j (Xi)



> 2

. (110) Define: 

vℓ,k,r (x) := 

q 

aj (r) ϕℓ,k j (x)



> j≥1

,

then the RHS in Equation 110 can be expressed as: 

> n

X

> i=1

ϵivℓ,k,r (Xi) ⊗ vℓ,k,r (Xi)

> op

. (111) Let 

ψℓ,k (r)2 := X

> j

aj (r) ≍ rD ℓk(r).

We now bound Equation 111 through a matrix concentration argument which requires bounding the operator norm of the following fourth-moment matrix: 

Mℓ,k (r) := E

h

vℓ,k,r (X) 22 vℓ,k,r (X) ⊗ vℓ,k,r (X)

i

.

48 We bound Mℓ,k (r) through Assumption 3. For every ∥u∥2 = 1 , write gu(x) = ⟨u, v ℓ,k,r (x)⟩. Then 

E[gu(X)2] = X

> j

u2 

> j

aj (r) ≤ r, 

since aj (r) ≤ r. Subsequently by Cauchy–Schwarz and hypercontractivity (Assumption 3), we obtain: 

u, M ℓ,k (r)u = X

> j

aj (r) E

h ϕℓ,k j (X)2gu(X)2i

≤ X

> j

aj (r) ϕℓ,k j

> 2
> L4(Px)

∥gu∥2

> L4(Px)

≤ H4 

> ℓ

ψℓ,k (r)2E[gu(X)2] ≤ H4 

> ℓ

r ψ ℓ,k (r)2.

Therefore 

Mℓ,k (r) 2 ≲ H4 

> ℓ

r ψ ℓ,k (r)2 ≍ H4 

> ℓ

r2Dℓk(r).

Matrix Bernstein then gives, up to constants and polylogarithmic factors: 

Eϵ sup  

> φ∈S ℓk(r)
> n

X

> i=1

ϵiφ(Xi)2 ≲ H2

> ℓ

√nr ψ ℓ,k (r) ≍ H2 

> ℓ

nr 

s

Dℓk(r)

n .

By symmetrization and the boundedness of labels, this yields (108) . Taking the maximum over shells gives the stated bound with rk,⋆ ℓ .

F.1 Estimating τ kℓ (n) in Feature space 

We discuss here how τ kℓ (n) can be estimated directly in the feature space (rather than in function space, as we did so far). Define the true label, weighted covariance: 

C(ℓ) := E[y zℓ−1(x)zℓ−1(x)⊤], (112) and the unweighted covariance: 

Σ(ℓ) := E[zℓ−1(x)zℓ−1(x)⊤]. (113) To estimate the cutoff nkℓ for the number of samples required for the recovery of ϕk, we proceed as follows: (i) Let v1, . . . vk−1 denote the top k − 1 eigenvectors of C(ℓ). Compute the residual covariance: 

Σ(ℓ) 

> k

:= ( I − vk−1v⊤

> k−1

)Σ(ℓ)

> k−1

(I − vk−1v⊤

> k−1

). (114) (ii) Let {λℓ,k j }∞ 

> j=1

denote the eigenvalues of Σ(ℓ) 

> k

. Then, for any r ∈ R, define: 

Dkℓ (r) := X

> j≥1

λℓ,k j

λℓ,k j + r . (115) (iii) Set rkℓ = arg max r≤λℓ,k 

> 1

r

q

Dkℓ (r). We predict the emergence of vk with samples nkℓ satisfying: 

nkℓ ∼

 rkℓ

ρ(k)

> ℓ



> 2

Dkℓ , (116) where ρ(k) 

> ℓ

is the kth eigenvalue of C(ℓ).49 F.2 Effective dimension in the Hermite toy model 

The abstract quantity Dℓk(r) becomes concrete in the toy model Appendix D. In this paragraph, k denotes the Hermite degree used to define the first hidden representation h(1) , not the index of the sequentially selected feature. Write the flattened degree-k Hermite tensor as 

Hk(x) = {Hα(x) : |α| = k} ∈ RDk , Dk =

d + k − 1

k



.

For Gaussian inputs, these coordinates are orthonormal in L2(Px). Hence, for any two coefficient vectors 

a, b ∈ RDk ,

E⟨a, H k(X)⟩⟨ b, H k(X)⟩ = ⟨a, b ⟩RDk .

Thus a degree-k candidate feature φa(x) = ⟨a, H k(x)⟩ is literally a vector in a Dk-dimensional Euclidean feature space as far as L2(Px) norms and projections are concerned. Equivalently, the degree-k Hermite kernel 

KH,k (x, x′) = ⟨Hk(x), H k(x′)⟩ = X

> |α|=k

Hα(x)Hα(x′)

has integral operator 

TH,k f = X

> |α|=k

⟨f, H α⟩L2(Px)Hα.

This is the orthogonal projector onto the degree-k Hermite chaos. Its only nonzero eigenvalue is 1, with multiplicity Dk. If the same block is reached through a random-feature activation, as in the construction of Subsection D.4, the eigenvalue is multiplied by the squared Hermite coefficient and by normalization constants, but the multiplicity is still at most Dk.Therefore, effective dimension relevant for the recovery of h(1) is bounded by this Hermite block rank. For a block eigenvalue ak > 0,

D(k)toy ,1(r) = 

> Dk

X

> j=1

ak

ak + r = ak

ak + r Dk ≤ Dk =

d + k − 1

k



= O(dk),

and for resolutions λ ≲ ak this is ≍ Dk. Hence, during first-level feature recovery, the statistical fluctuation is governed by the ambient degree-k Hermite space. The planted first-level variables in Appendix D, 

h(1)  

> i

(x) = ⟨A(1)  

> i

, H k(x)⟩, i = 1 , . . . , d 1,

form a d1 = dϵ dimensional signal subspace inside this Dk = O(dk) dimensional Hermite block. The residual effective dimension controls the size of the empirical noise over the full candidate block, while the planted subspace controls the rank and strength of the population signal. Concretely, by the definition of y,we have that: 

E[y(h(1)  

> i

(x)) 2] ∼ 1

√d1

(117) Substituting the above scaling into the sample complexity prediction prescribed by Theorem 5 gives the dk+ϵ

first-stage sample scale stated in Appendix D. 50 F.3 Effective dimension in the multi-index models 

We now discuss how the sample complexity prediction in Proposition 5 recovers the rates in the setting of multi-index models with power-law dependence on the label. We follow here [40, 77] and consider hierarchical multi-index target y = f ∗(⟨w∗

> 1

, x⟩, . . . , ⟨w∗ 

> r

, x⟩) + ξ

with isotropic Gaussian inputs x ∼ N (0 , Id) and orthonormal teacher directions {w∗ 

> i

}ri=1 . Because the input covariance is the identity Dℓ ≍ d, at the slice-wise scale used in Proposition 5. The features at layer ℓ along each candidate direction have unit variance under the Gaussian input, so the variance scale is order one, τ = r(k) 

> ℓ

= O(1) . Finally, the power-law dependence of the label on the teacher coefficients translates into a power-law decay of the population correlations across the planted directions: the i-th spike satisfies ρ(i) 

> ℓ

= O(i−γ ), where γ > 0 is the exponent governing the label spectrum. Plugging Dℓk ≍ d,

τ = O(1) and ρ(i) = O(i−γ ) into the recovery condition n ≫ (r(k) 

> ℓ

)2Dℓk/(ρ(k) 

> ℓ

)2 of Proposition 5 yields the sample-complexity threshold ni ≳ d i 2γ for resolving the i-th spike, which matches the optimal scaling laws derived in [40, 77]. 51 10 1 10 2 10 3

k1

> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> k2

n = 1000   

> 17.2 17.6 18.0 18.4 18.8 10 110 210 3

k1

> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> k2

n = 5000  

> 14.4 15.2 16.0 16.8 10 210 4

k1

> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> k2

n = 10000    

> 13.0 14.0 15.0 16.0 17.0 Figure 8: Test Error (%) as a function of the kept features for Kernel LoFi for different training dataset sizes n. Stars indicate the best (k1, k 2)in each grid. The optimal retained dimension is finite and different from the usual kernel case (upper right corner), mirroring the behavior of the finite-width Neural LoFi heatmaps in Figure 3

# G Additional Numerical Explorations 

G.1 Neural LoFi Kernel Limit 

The kernel formulation of Neural LoFi developed in Appendix E replaces the random projections Rℓ of Algorithm 1 by their kernel expectations and computes the generalized eigenvalue problem of Proposition 3 on the n×n Gram matrix. The resulting estimator is deterministic in the projection randomness and depends on (x1: n, y 1: n) only through the kernel Kℓ−1 and the labels. Figure 8 reports the test error of kernel LoFi on binary CIFAR-10 over the per-layer retained ranks (k1, k 2),at two training-set sizes. First, the error landscape is U-shaped in the same way as its finite-width counterpart in Figure 3: keeping too few features discards predictive signal, keeping too many includes eigendirections that are not separated from the noise bulk at this sample size, and the optimum sits at intermediate (k1, k 2).Second, the location of this optimum shifts toward larger ranks as n grows. Both effects are those predicted by the relevance–complexity criterion of Theorem 1 and the emergence threshold of Equation (17): more samples lower the noise floor τ kℓ (n), allowing additional low-degree directions to cross it. Read together with the convergence experiment of Figure 10, in which the finite-width LoFi error approaches the kernel-LoFi error from above as the projection width p grows, this establishes that the U-shape and the sample-dependent rank optimum are properties of the supervised spectral mechanism itself rather than artifacts of the random projections used in practice. This is also what distinguishes kernel LoFi from standard fixed-kernel methods such as the NNGP or NTK: the operator diagonalized at each layer is built from the labels, so the geometry in which the next layer searches for signal changes with the task. Kernel LoFi is, in this sense, the simplest deterministic object that captures the layerwise task-adaptivity of feature learning described in the main text. The Neural LoFi kernel also gives a feature-space perspective on why overparameterization and pruning are not contradictory. Classical pruning methods show that many weights or connections can be removed after training with little loss in performance [99, 100], while the lottery-ticket hypothesis suggests that large dense networks may contain smaller trainable subnetworks [101]. In Neural LoFi, width and rank play complementary roles: large width creates a rich feature space in which task-correlated directions can be discovered, while spectral pruning retains only the directions that finite data can reliably support. Thus large networks are useful for discovery, but low-rank feature selection controls the effective dimension used for prediction. 52 G.2 Measuring the feature alignment of LoFi with GD 

In order to establish if the features learned by LoFi are a good approximation of those learned by GD, we aim to measure how the alignment grows during GD training, when compared with the features learned by LoFi. Let’s consider a setting where we train the same architecture with both GD and LoFi, and we measure the overlap between the features at each layer. More concretely, let zLoFi  

> ℓ

(xμ) denote the features at layer ℓ

learned by LoFi, and let zGD  

> ℓ

(xμ, t ) denote the features at the same layer learned by GD at training step t;both are vector representations of the same dimension pℓ. We can then compute the featurewise overlap as 

Fℓ(t) 

> ij

= 1

n

> n

X

> μ=1



zLoFi  

> ℓ,i

(xμ) −

D

zLoFi 

> ℓ,i

E  

zGD  

> ℓ,j

(xμ, t ) −

D

zGD  

> ℓ,j

(t)

Es

zLoFi  

> ℓ,i

(xμ) −

D

zLoFi 

> ℓ,i

E2s

zGD  

> ℓ,j

(xμ, t ) −

D

zGD  

> ℓ,j

(t)

E2 , (118) where 

D

zLoFi 

> ℓ,i

E

and 

D

zGD  

> ℓ,j

(t)

E

denote the mean of the respective features across the dataset. This matrix 

Fℓ(t) ∈ Rpℓ×pℓ captures the pairwise correlations between the features learned by LoFi and GD at layer ℓ

and training step t. Features are permutation invariant, so we consider the Frobenius norm of the overlap matrix as a measure of overall alignment, normalized by its initial value at random initialization: Normalized Overlap ℓ(t) = ∥Fℓ(t)∥F − ∥ Fℓ(0) ∥F

∥Fℓ(0) ∥F

. (119) The normalization is required because having every layer a different pℓ and different spreadness of the features, the initial overlap at random initialization can be different across layers, and we want to measure the relative growth of the alignment during training. In Figure 4, we plot the evolution of Alignment ℓ(t) for each layer ℓ during GD training, for a 4 layer fully-connected network trained on a binary classification task on CIFAR-10. 

G.3 Generalization and Spectral Performance: GD vs. LoFi 

In this experiment we aim to train networks for image binary classification (Animals vs. Vehicles in CIFAR-10) using both Neural LoFi and Gradient Descent (GD), and compare their generalization performance across a range of training set sizes. We investigate the generalization properties of Neural LoFi relative to GD by evaluating their test performance across varying training set sizes n ∈ [10 2, 5 × 10 4]. To ensure a controlled comparison, we fix the architectures for both FC and CNN models to have a comparable number of parameters and identical random projection dimensions. For GD, we employ a compute-constrained training protocol where the total number of gradient steps is held constant across dataset sizes. We adopt an adaptive scaling law for the learning rate, η ∝ pB/n , where B is the batch size, and utilize a cosine annealing schedule with a linear warmup. This ensures stable convergence dynamics without the need for exhaustive per-configuration hyperparameter tuning. In contrast, LoFi remains a one-pass algorithm requiring only the selection of the eigenvector bottleneck kℓ.Figure 1 illustrates the test error as a function of the training set size. We observe that LoFi achieves generalization performance comparable to, and in low-sample regimes occasionally superior to, GD. By reporting GD performance at varying step intervals, we demonstrate that LoFi, despite being a one-pass spectral method, captures a feature set equivalent to that learned by GD during its early-to-mid training stages. 53 10 1 10 2 10 3

k

> 20
> 30
> Test error (%)

n = 10000   

> 10 110 210 3

k

n = 25000 

p         

> 100 500 1k 5k Figure 9: Test error (%) as a function of the number of retained features kat the hidden layer, for a one-hidden-layer Neural LoFi with ReLU activation on CIFAR-10, for varying number of random projections pand two training set sizes. The input and output layers are not reduced. The optimal kincreases with p, and larger pconsistently yields lower test error.

While GD eventually outperforms LoFi as the training budget increases, this gap is expected; GD iteratively refines features across the full model capacity, whereas LoFi performs a sequential, layer-wise spectral projection. Crucially, these results are obtained without auxiliary regularization (e.g., dropout, early stopping) or optimized filtering levels for LoFi. Thus, the results in Figure 1 suggest that the spectral alignment of LoFi is not merely a theoretical property but a robust driver of generalization in deep architectures. 

G.4 Filtering of Features 

Figure 9 shows the test error as a function of k for a single hidden layer, where only the intermediate representation is subject to Neural LoFi’s feature selection. The curve structure mirrors the two-dimensional heatmaps of Figure 3, now collapsed to a single axis. As p increases the resulting test error improves and the optimal number of retained features k⋆ increases. Crucially, selecting too few or too many features degrades performance, confirming that the U-shaped trade-off observed in Figure 3. 

G.5 Predicting the sample complexity for feature recovery 

The variational analysis of Section 3.1 predicts that the k-th eigenvector of the layer-ℓ signed covariance becomes recoverable once the population correlation ρ(k) 

> ℓ

exceeds the empirical noise floor τ kℓ (n), with the latter controlled by the residual effective dimension of the kernel induced by the previous layer. This is an asymptotic statement, and the quantitative prediction Eq. (116) rests on assumptions that CIFAR-10 features are not designed to satisfy. The experiment in Fig. 5 (and its convolutional analog Fig. 11) is intended as a stress test of the prediction in that regime. We use the full binary CIFAR-10 training set ( N = 60 ,000 , animals vs. vehicles) as a population proxy: running Neural LoFi on this set yields stable reference eigenvectors {ˆv(N ) 

> i

}i≥1 at the layer of interest. We then refit the same pipeline on random subsets of size n ≤ N , holding the random projections W1, W2 fixed across subsets, and record the index-aligned overlap |⟨ ˆv(n) 

> i

, ˆv(N ) 

> i

⟩| 2, averaged over 100 independent dataset permutations. In the convolutional figure we plot the eight overlaps after sorting them descending within each draw, which is robust to the |λ|-ordering swaps that arise when two leading eigenvalues of opposite sign have similar magnitude. The predicted thresholds nkℓ are obtained from the proxy at n = N by the recursive procedure of App. F and use no information from the smaller-n runs. 54 0.6

0.8

λ = 10 −2 λ = 10 −1 λ = 1 

k1=k2=50 

λ = 10 

0.6

0.8

1.0

> test MSE

k1=k2=100 

10 3 10 5

p

0.6

0.8

1.0

10 3 10 5

p

10 3 10 5

p

10 3 10 5

p

k1=k2=200       

> n=200 n=500 n=1k n=2k n=5k finite RF NLoFi-NNGP

Figure 10: Convergence of finite-width NLoFi to the NLoFi-NNGP limit as the hidden width p grows. Each panel shows the test MSE versus p for four training-set sizes n. Solid curves are finite-RF NLoFi; dashed horizontal lines mark the corresponding NLoFi-NNGP limits at the same n. Rows vary the number of retained eigenfeatures per layer ( k1 = k2 ∈ { 50 , 100 , 200 }); columns vary the ridge regularisation λ. Across all settings the finite-width curves converge from above to the kernel limit. 

55 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4

n

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> sort i j v(n)
> i ; v (N)
> i
> ®j2

Layer 1    

> 10 110 210 310 4

n

Layer 2         

> i= 1
> i= 2
> i= 3
> i= 4
> i= 5
> i= 6
> i= 7
> i= 8

Figure 11: Predicting when individual features emerge on CIFAR-10 with convolutional networks. Convolutional analog of Fig. 5 in the main text. For a CNN Neural LoFi model on the CIFAR-10 animal-vs.-vehicle task (random fea-ture matrices W1, W2 held fixed across subsamples), we track the squared overlap |⟨ v(n) 

> i

, v (N ) 

> i

⟩| 2 between eigenvectors estimated from n samples and the large-sample reference eigenvectors at layer 1 (Left) and 2 (Right). At each sample size we order the eight tracked overlaps from largest to smallest within each draw, so i = 1 is the best-aligned axis at that n and so on; curves show mean ± SEM over 100 random subsamples. Dashed verticals are the predicted emergence thresholds nkℓ from (17) ,(18) , sorted ascending and color-matched to the curves (see Eq. (116) in the Appendix). The sharp rise of each curve near its predicted threshold shows that the effective-dimension criterion predicts the order and approximate scale at which successive task-relevant directions become learnable. 

The predicted thresholds (dashed verticals) track the order and approximate scale of the empirical transitions across the eight leading eigenvectors, which themselves are sharp on a logarithmic scale and saturate in the order predicted by the recursive effective-dimension recipe — consistent with the BBP/EA picture of Section 3.1. The bound is qualitative and not tight, so the prediction should be read as the correct scaling of 

nkℓ with the residual effective dimension and the spectral gap rather than as an absolute threshold; even at this level, however, a single eigendecomposition on a reference set is enough to indicate the order of magnitude at which each eigendirection becomes extractable. 

G.6 Spectrum of the signed covariance 

The core of LoFi is the spectral decomposition of the signed covariance operator, thus it is crucial to understand the structure of its spectrum. We analyze the eigenvalue spectra learned by ridge spectral networks on a binary CIFAR-10 classification task (animal vs. vehicle). The architecture comprises two convolutional layers with p = 512 channels, each followed by 2 × 2 max pooling and L2 normalization of the features—concluding with a fully-connected layer of p = 512 units. All layers are trained using signed-covariance eigendecomposition with eigenvalue-based feature selection (ridge spectral training). We evaluate the model across a range of training set sizes (n ∈ { 200 , 500 , 2000 , 50000 }) while maintaining a fixed network architecture. The grid plots in Figure 12 illustrate the full eigenvalue spectrum for each layer, utilizing a symlog x-axis to resolve both fine-grained and large-magnitude spectral components. The top five eigenvalues per layer are highlighted with red triangles, revealing how the spectral structure evolves with data scale and illustrating the relative importance of dominant versus distributed features across the network depth. 56 10 0   

> 10 1
> 10 2
> n = 200
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> n = 500
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> n = 2000
> −10 0−10 −1010 −110 0

First convolutional    

> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> n = 50000
> −10 0−10 −1010 −110 0

Second convolutional    

> −10 0−10 −1010 −110 0

Fully connected 

> ntrain  = 200 ntrain  = 500 ntrain  = 2000 ntrain  = 50000

Figure 12: Spectral Distribution: Histograms of eigenvalues across network layers (columns) and dataset sizes (rows). Red markers indicate the five most dominant eigenvalues. The symlog scale reveals the emergence of spectral structure and the separation of lead features from the bulk distribution as n grows. The random feature dimension in this experiment is p = 512 for all layers. 

57 High Cheekbones  Input Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> Importance Smiling

Input Layer 1 Layer 2 Layer 3 

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> Importance

Figure 13: Layer-wise feature importance ¯I(ℓ) (Equation (121)) on CelebA [117] for two binary attributes. (Top, High Cheekbones) Importance concentrates progressively on the cheekbone region across layers, while the chin area, salient at the input, is progressively suppressed in deeper layers. (Bottom, Smiling) Importance remains focused on the mouth and jaw region throughout all layers, reflecting that the discriminative signal for this attribute is preserved and not discarded by Neural LoFi’s feature selection. This contrast illustrates that the retained features are task-dependent and geometrically meaningful. 

G.7 Feature Visualization 

Input importance To probe which input pixels drive the activation along v(ℓ) 

> k

, we back-propagate through the random features and accumulate the absolute Jacobian–vector product over the training set, 

I(ℓ) 

> k

(d) = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

∂∂x i,d 



v(ℓ)⊤ 

> k

ϕℓ(xi)



= 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

Jℓ(xi)⊤v(ℓ)  

> kd

, (120) where Jℓ(x) = ∂ϕ ℓ(x)/∂x ∈ RP ×D. The raw map I(ℓ) 

> k

is convolved with an isotropic Fourier low-pass filter 

m(f ) = (1 + ∥f ∥/f 0)−α to suppress high-frequency noise inherited from the random projections. For the input layer ( ℓ = 0 ) the Jacobian collapses to the identity and (120) reduces to I(0)  

> k

(d) =  v(0) 

> k

2

> d

.Different eigenvectors carry very different amounts of label signal. Rather than treating them uniformly, we aggregate the Kℓ retained per-k importance maps with weights given by the absolute signed-covariance eigenvalues, 

¯I(ℓ)(d) = 

PKℓ−1 

> k=0

|λ(ℓ) 

> k

| I(ℓ) 

> k

(d)

PKℓ−1 

> k=0

|λ(ℓ) 

> k

| . (121) This emphasises directions that most strongly co-vary with the target while preserving the spatial information carried by the lower-ranked, but still label-aligned, eigenvectors. In Figure 13 each panel shows ¯I(ℓ) reshaped to the 64 ×64 image grid and averaged over the three colour channels. We min–max rescale each panel independently to [0 , 1] . The shared colorbar reports this per-panel normalised intensity. The vertical label on the leftmost panel names the binary CelebA attribute used as y.58 R G Bactivation of top eigenvector 

activation of 7th eigenvector 

Figure 14: Filters and activations for CNNs. We train a 6 convolutional + 1 fully connected layer neural network on CelebA [117] for binary classification of the "Gender" attribute, using Neural LoFi with signed-covariance eigendecom-position and eigenvalue-based feature selection. (Left) The 5 × 5 first-layer filters learned by Neural LoFi, visualized as RGB images. (Right) The activations of the top-ranked (1st) and mid-ranked (7th) eigenvectors at each convolutional layer (lower rows are deeper), for 6 images of the test set. 

Filter and activations for CNNs In Section 4 we have already discussed the filters and activations learned by LoFi for CNNs. Here we provide additional visualizations of these filters and activations, for different layers and training set sizes. In Figure 14 we show the first-layer filters learned by LoFi, as well as the activations of the top-ranked and mid-ranked eigenvectors at each convolutional layer. Despite being larger than the filters learned on CIFAR-10 (Figure 6), the filters learned on CelebA are still interpretable as edge detectors, with a variety of orientations and frequencies. It is interesting to compare the features learned by different eigenvectors: the top eigenvector tends to be a brightness filter and converges to the same representation when going deeper. The mid-ranked eigenvector, instead, learns more complex features even at the first layer, obtaining a self-evident representation of the sample after the last convolutional layer. 59 H Code Implementation 

All experiments are carried out with a self-contained Python package built on PyTorch [118], Numpy [119], Scipy [120] and scikit-learn [121]. The source code is available in the attached zip file. For each layer ℓ = 1 , . . . , L , the trainer (i) estimates the RMS norm cℓ =   1

> n

P 

> i

∥h(i)

> ℓ−1

∥21/2 to keep pre-activations O(1) ; (ii) draws a frozen random map Wℓ ∈ Rdℓ−1×pℓ , Wℓ,ij ∼ N (0 , 1) , and forms 

Zℓ = p−1/2 

> ℓ

σℓ

 Hℓ−1Wℓ/c ℓ

; (iii) computes the top-kℓ eigenvectors Vℓ of the signed covariance Cℓ = 

> 1
> n

Z⊤ 

> ℓ

diag( y) Zℓ ranked by |λ|; and (iv) sets Hℓ = ZℓVℓ.The eigendecomposition of Cℓ is the dominant cost, and three paths are dispatched automatically based on 

(n, p ℓ, k ℓ): for pℓ ≤ 25 ,000 on GPU, Cℓ is formed explicitly and diagonalised with torch.linalg.eigh ;for moderate pℓ on CPU, the full LAPACK eigensolver is used when kℓ ≥ pℓ/4 and Lanczos (scipy.sparse.linalg.eigsh ) otherwise; for pℓ > 50 ,000 and kℓ ≤ pℓ/2, a LinearOperator 

is passed to eigsh so that Cℓ is never materialised, requiring only O(np ℓ) memory and two passes per Lanczos iteration. A deterministic starting vector v0 = 1/√pℓ ensures reproducibility, and when Zℓ does not fit in GPU memory, features are streamed in batches and Cℓ is accumulated via outer products before calling 

eigsh .The final representation HL is passed to sklearn.linear_model.RidgeCV ; classification accuracy is obtained by thresholding at zero (targets ±1). 

H.1 Figure Reproducibility 

We list below the hyperparameters used for each figure (panel by panel). Unless stated otherwise, random-feature weights are Gaussian, biases are zero, the final readout is ridge regression, and curves are averaged over multiple seeds. 

Figure 3, left. Binary CIFAR-10 (animals vs. vehicles), L = 3 ReLU LoFi layers. Test error vs. n for ridge, 3-layer random features, and LoFi with p ∈ { 5000 , 10000 }; LoFi ranks (k1, k 2) optimally found after a logarithmic grid search in [2 , p − 1] 2. Ridge λ optimally tuned with RidgeCV from [121] in [10 −6, 10 6]

with 500 points; 10 seeds. 

Figure 3, right. Same setup. Test error grid over (k1, k 2) at fixed p = 5000 , k3 = p, for n ∈ { 5000 , 10000 , 20000 , 50000 }.Stars mark the best (k1, k 2) in each grid. 10 seeds. 

Figure 4. Four-layer FC ReLU net on binary CIFAR-10; width p = 1000 , LoFi ranks k = 25 , n = 50000 .SGD: batch size 512, lr 0.06 with cosine + warmup, 98 steps. 

Figure 6, left. Binary CIFAR-10 animal-vehicle. Convolutional LoFi: 4 conv layers ( 3×3, 2×2 pool, L2

norm) + 1 FC layer; channels p = 4096 , ranks 32,64,128,256, ReLU; n = 50000 . Top first-layer filters from the three RGB channels. 

Figure 6, right. Same architecture. Activation maps of the 6th LoFi feature on test images at successive depths. 

Figure 2, left, center. Hierarchical teacher of App. D with k = 2 , ϵ = 12 and g⋆ = tanh ; d ∈ { 80 , 100 , 120 , 140 }.RF widths (p1, p 2) ∈ { (20000 , 512) , (30000 , 768) , (40000 , 1024) , (50000 , 1280) }, spherical weights, and activations as in App. D.2. The top eigenvectors are computed with a power iteration using at most 

15 iterations and oversampling parameter 10 . Readout: polynomial kernel of maximal degree 5, ridge regularization 10 −6, kernel regularization 10 −4. Left: test MSE vs. α = log( n)/ log( d). Center: overlap between bh(1) and h(1) vs. α. 10 seeds. 60 Figure 2, right. Same hierarchical teacher with q = 2 , d = 100 , ϵ = 12 , α = 3 , and g⋆ = tanh , using a first-layer random-feature width p1 = 10000 and the activations of App. D.2. The displayed spectrum is computed with a randomized eigensolver. One seed. 

Figure 7 Same hierarchical teacher as in Figure 2, right, with q = 2 , d = 100 , ϵ = 12 , and g⋆ = tanh ,using a first-layer random-feature width p1 = 10000 and the activations of App. D.2. The figure shows the spectrum of the first-layer spectral operator for several values of α ∈ { 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5}, each computed with a randomized eigensolver. One seed per value of α.

Figure 8 Kernel LoFi (App. E) on binary CIFAR-10 (animals vs. vehicles), L = 3 layers, ReLU activation. Test error grid over (k1, k 2) ∈ [10 , n − 1] 2 for n ∈ { 1000 , 5000 }; stars mark the best (k1, k 2). 10 seeds. The final optimization for the ridge parameter of Kernel Ridge Regression is done for λ ∈ [10 −5, 1] with 20 log-spaced points. 

Figure 1. Binary CIFAR-10 animal vehicle, n ∈ [10 2, 5 × 10 4]. Matched architectures with p = 4096 , The LoFi ranks are kept fixed between architectures 32 , 64 , 128 , 256 . SGD: batch B = 512 , η ∝ pB/n 

(peak 0.01), cosine + warmup, total steps fixed across n. 10 seeds. 

Figure 9. Binary CIFAR-10, single LoFi hidden layer (ReLU), only the hidden representation reduced to rank k. p ∈ { 100 , 500 , 1000 , 5000 }, n ∈ { 10000 , 25000 }, λ optimally tuned with RidgeCV from [121] in [10 −6, 10 6] with 500 points. Shading: ±1 std over 5 seeds. 

Figure 10. Binary CIFAR-10 (animals vs. vehicles), 3-layer ReLU LoFi with last layer before Ridge not reduced. Test MSE vs. width p for n ∈ { 200 , 500 , 1000 , 2000 , 5000 }. All shaded areas are average over 10 seeds. 

Figure 5 Binary CIFAR-10 (animals vs. vehicles); a 2-layer ReLU LoFi with a population proxy obtained from the full dataset ( N = 60 ,000 ). For each sample size n, the LoFi pipeline is fit on a fresh permutation of n training points (with W1, W2 held fixed across permutations); we plot the index-aligned overlap 

|⟨ ˆv(n) 

> i

, ˆv(N ) 

> i

⟩| 2 for the top i = 1 , . . . , 6 eigenvectors of the layer-ℓ signed covariance. Mean ± SEM over 

100 dataset permutations. Dashed verticals: predicted thresholds nkℓ from Equation (116). 

Figure 11 Binary CIFAR-10 (animals vs. vehicles); a 2-layer convolutional ReLU LoFi (random convolu-tions with P = 5 ,000 channels, 5×5 kernels, padding 2, stride 1; layer-1 eigenreduction K1 = 100 ) with a population proxy obtained from N = 30 ,000 samples. For each sample size n, the LoFi pipeline is fit on a fresh permutation of n training points (with W1, W2 held fixed across permutations); we plot the per-layer diagonal overlaps |⟨ ˆv(n) 

> i

, ˆv(N ) 

> i

⟩| 2 for i = 1 , . . . , 8, sorted descending within each draw so that i = 1 is best-aligned axis at that n. Mean ± SEM over 100 dataset permutations. Dashed verticals: predicted thresholds nkℓ from Equation (116). 

Figure 12. Binary CIFAR-10. Two conv layers (kernel 3 × 3, p = 512 , 2×2 pool, L2 norm) + FC layer (p = 512 ); n ∈ { 200 , 500 , 2000 , 50000 }, ranks kℓ = 32 , 64 , 128 . Symlog x-axis; top-5 eigenvalues marked. 

Figure 13, top. CelebA at 64 ×64 , attribute High Cheekbones from CelebA. L = 3 FC LoFi layers (ReLU), 

P = 50000 , (k1, k 2, k 3) = (100 , 50 , 20) , n = 200 ,000 , seed 0. Importance via Eq. (121) ; Fourier low-pass parameters f0 = 0 .15 , α = 3 .0.

Figure 13, bottom. Same setup, attribute Smiling from CelebA. 

Figure 14, left. CelebA Gender . Six conv LoFi layers ( 5×5, 2×2 pool, L2 norm) + FC layer; channels 

p = 512 , ranks 16, 32,64,128,256,512 , ReLU; n = 500000 . First-layer 5×5 filters as RGB images. 61 Figure 14, right. Same architecture. Activations of the 1st-ranked (top) and 7th-ranked (bottom) eigenvec-tors at each conv layer (shallow →deep), on six test images. 62