Title: Dynamic sampling of non-stationary spontaneous activity in dissociated neuronal networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.24269v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 02:19:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# DYNAMIC SAMPLING OF NON -STATIONARY SPONTANEOUS ACTIVITY IN DISSOCIATED NEURONAL NETWORKS 

PREPRINT 

Kazushi Takehana 1, Dai Akita 1, and  Hirokazu Takahashi 1,2∗

> 1

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 

> 2

International Research Center for Neurointelligence (WPI-IRCN), The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 

k.takehana@ne.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, d.akita@ne.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, takahashi@i.u-tokyo.ac.jp 

# ABSTRACT 

Objective. To develop and evaluate an adaptive electrode-selection method for tracking non-stationary spontaneous activity during long-term high-density microelectrode array (HD-MEA) recordings under a fixed channel budget. 

Approach. We formulated electrode allocation as a sequential subset-selection problem and used a discounted Poisson–Gamma model with Thompson sampling. The method updated electrode-specific activity estimates from observed spike counts and reallocated a fixed channel budget over time. We evaluated it by offline replay of nine 34 h HD-MEA recordings, selecting 100 electrodes from 529 densely routed candidates, and in a representative online recording using 1,024 routed electrodes. 

Main results. Across offline recordings, the top-100 active-electrode set changed substantially, reaching 47.8% turnover at 34 h. The Bayesian method captured the largest fraction of the spikes available to an oracle selector among the tested strategies and exceeded static selection by 17.2 percentage points at the final time point. In the online recording, adaptive selection captured the first synchronized burst and supported center-of-activity trajectory analysis. 

Significance. Uncertainty-aware exploration and temporal discounting can improve HD-MEA recording efficiency under fixed readout constraints, providing a basis for adaptive sensing of evolving neural activity. 

Keywords high-density microelectrode array · adaptive electrode selection · non-stationary spontaneous activity ·

synchronized burst · Thompson sampling 

# 1 Introduction 

Planar microelectrode arrays (MEAs) were developed to monitor bioelectric activity from cultured cells using mul-tiple substrate-integrated electrodes [ 1]. Passive MEAs with tens of recording sites, including widely used 60- or 64-electrode formats, then became a standard platform for in vitro extracellular electrophysiology; early planar-array studies established that cultured neurons could be electri-cally stimulated and recorded from on the same substrate [ 2, 3 ]. Because they are compatible with repeated extra-cellular measurements from the same preparation, MEAs are particularly useful for dissociated neuronal cultures, which are now widely used to study how collective neural dynamics emerge, reorganize, and stabilize during develop-ment [ 4– 9]. As synaptic connectivity matures, spontaneous activity typically shifts from sparse, weakly coordinated firing to synchronized bursting and structured population dynamics [ 5, 6, 8– 11 ]. Because these dynamics are closely linked to network development, plasticity, prediction-like responses, and state transitions, long-term electrophysi-ological measurements are central to understanding how cultured neuronal networks self-organize over time [ 12 –14]. High-density microelectrode arrays (HD-MEAs) have ex-panded these measurements by combining dense spatial sampling with the temporal resolution needed to resolve extracellular spikes, burst propagation, and subcellular electrical footprints [ 3, 15 – 19 ]. A key step was the inte-

> ∗

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. arXiv:2607.24269v1 [q-bio.NC] 27 Jul 2026 Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT A  

> BC
> DE
> F

Figure 1: Experimental setup and offline evaluation framework. (A) Culture preparation workflow. Cortices were isolated from embryonic day 18 (E18) Wistar rats, dissociated using trypsin, and plated onto HD-MEAs coated with polyethylenimine (PEI) and laminin. (B) Representative fluorescence image of a dissociated neuronal culture at day in vitro 15 (DIV15), immunostained for microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2; green) and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA; red), with nuclei counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; blue). (C) Full-array firing-rate map constructed from an initial scan of the neuronal culture. To cover the full 26,400-electrode array, 1,024 electrodes were recorded for 60 s per configuration across 26 configurations. The recording area was 3.85 × 2.10 mm 2, with 17.5 

μm electrode pitch and 11.5 × 11.5 μm2 electrode size. The red square indicates the local 23 × 23 electrode region used for dense long-term recording. (D) Long-term activity maps recorded from the 529 routed electrodes shown in (C) at 0, 10, 20, and 34 h after recording onset. Red open circles indicate the 100 electrodes with the highest firing rates at each time point. (E) Schematic illustration of selecting 1,024 electrodes from the full 26,400-electrode array. Red squares indicate selected electrodes. (F) Schematic illustration of the offline evaluation setting, in which 100 electrodes were selected from the 529-electrode candidate set. Red squares indicate selected electrodes. 2Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

gration of CMOS circuitry beneath the electrode array. In switch-matrix-based designs, introduced to make dense electrode grids experimentally usable, many electrodes can be connected through programmable routing to a smaller set of recording and stimulation channels [ 15 , 17 , 18 ]. This architecture makes it possible to examine activity across multiple scales, from local cellular signals to culture-wide network events. The spatial resolution is particularly valu-able in dissociated cultures, where spontaneous activity can include localized initiation sites, propagating bursts, and recurring spatiotemporal motifs [10, 20, 21]. The cost of this scaling is a readout bottleneck. In many switch-matrix CMOS HD-MEAs, the electrode count greatly exceeds the number of low-noise amplifiers, analog-to-digital converters, and data paths available for simul-taneous recording, so only a limited subset of electrodes can be routed to recording channels at any given time [22 ]. This constraint reflects the separation between dense electrode sites and a smaller number of low-noise read-out chains: electrode pixels mainly implement routing switches and memory elements to preserve spatial reso-lution, whereas amplifiers, filters, and analog-to-digital converters are placed outside the sensing area and shared by user-selected electrodes [ 17 ]. This architecture helps maintain high spatial resolution, low noise, and low power, but it makes simultaneous recording a routing problem from many electrodes to fewer channels. In the platform used here, for example, 26,400 electrodes are available on the array, but at most 1,024 electrodes can be routed simultaneously [ 17 ]. Other CMOS architectures, including active-pixel and very-large-scale arrays, have demonstrated more parallel or even full-array readout when the sensing electronics and data pipeline are designed for that pur-pose [ 23 , 24 ]. Recent large-area CMOS-MEA technology has extended this direction further, enabling field-potential imaging with 236,880 electrodes over a millimeter-scale area at single-neuron resolution [ 25 ]. Such systems reduce the hardware need to choose among electrodes, but they also highlight a complementary challenge: as recording scales grow, data volume, storage, and downstream analy-sis can still make task-dependent subset selection useful. For widely used switch-matrix HD-MEAs, electrode selec-tion is an immediate experimental constraint. In practice, this limitation is often handled by first scanning the array to identify active sites and then assigning the available channels to a fixed electrode subset for subsequent record-ing. Such scan-and-commit workflows are practical, but they assume that informative electrodes remain informative over the measurement period. For spontaneous activity in dissociated neuronal networks, this assumption is fragile. Firing rates, burst statistics, synchrony, and propagation patterns change over develop-ment [ 5 , 6, 8 , 9, 11 ], and synchronized bursts can follow state-dependent propagation patterns rather than a single fixed origin [ 20 ]. Long-term HD-MEA studies have also shown that changes in culture morphology and network configuration can be reflected in the recorded activity maps [26 , 27 ]. Consequently, electrodes that are highly informa-tive at one time point may become less informative later, even in the same culture. A static assignment can therefore miss activity that emerges away from the initially selected sites. These changes span time scales that are directly relevant to electrode allocation. Over seconds to minutes, individual bursts can vary in recruited sites and propagation struc-ture [ 4 , 6 , 20 , 21 , 28 ]; over hours, burst-related activity can exhibit stable probabilistic structure that requires spa-tial coverage beyond instantaneous firing rate [ 4, 10 ]; and across many hours to days, activity maps can shift with development, morphology, and network configuration [ 4–6 , 9, 26 , 27 ]. For electrode selection, the useful subset is therefore a time-dependent representation of the current network state rather than a fixed anatomical label. Without updates, changes in burst recruitment or active-region lo-cation can reduce both spike yield and downstream spatial readouts such as propagation maps or center-of-activity trajectories [ 20 , 29 ]. Thus, adaptive allocation is important for maintaining access to the evolving collective dynamics that make long-term cultures informative. The gap between the spatial richness of HD-MEAs and the limited number of simultaneously recordable channels raises a simple question: under a fixed channel budget, which electrodes should be selected next? Multiplexed neural recording hardware makes this trade-off explicit [22 ], and adaptive electrode selection has been explored to improve signal quality or neuron yield in other recording settings [ 30 ]. More broadly, closed-loop in vitro electro-physiology has used ongoing activity to guide stimulation, including control of bursting in cortical cultures [ 31 ] and al-gorithmically selected training signals in cortical organoids [ 32 ]. Although such work addresses adaptive stimulation rather than adaptive sensing, it illustrates a shift toward experiments in which the next measurement or interven-tion is chosen from ongoing neural activity. Adaptive electrode selection has been less examined for long-term spontaneous recordings, where the objective is to track a non-stationary collective process rather than only to maxi-mize unit isolation. This setting is naturally framed as online decision-making under uncertainty. Multi-armed bandit methods formal-ize the exploration–exploitation trade-off, and Bayesian approaches such as Thompson sampling propagate uncer-tainty across decisions and can be adapted to non-stationary environments [ 33 – 38 ]. From this perspective, HD-MEA electrode allocation is an adaptive sensing problem: each recording window provides partial information that guides the next channel assignment. In this study, we formulate electrode selection for long-term spontaneous HD-MEA recordings as a sequential subset selection problem under non-stationarity. The ex-perimental preparation, recording configuration, and down-scaled evaluation setting are summarized in figure 1. We propose a Bayesian adaptive framework that updates each electrode’s expected usefulness from observed spike activ-ity and selects the next subset under a fixed channel budget. 3Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT Prior 

> Density

Posterior 

Electrode. #123 

Electrode Activity 

HD -MEA 

Electrodes 

Electrode. #123 

spikes      

> 50
> 0
> -50
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> Time (s)
> Amplitude ( μV)

① Record activity, filter 

② Update activity distribution 

Electrode. #123 

③ Process for all electrodes 

④ Re -sample configuration 

with high activity 

Configured electrodes 

# Update by iteration 

#123 

> Density

#10 

Electrode Activity 

#211 #200 

#7 

Figure 2: Overview of the adaptive electrode selection framework. Red electrodes indicate the subset currently routed for recording under the fixed channel budget. In each recording window, extracellular traces from the routed electrodes are filtered and converted to spike counts. These observations update the probabilistic activity model for each observed electrode, shifting the posterior activity distribution from the prior according to the recorded spikes. The same update-and-selection procedure is repeated across electrodes and time windows. At the next step, the algorithm uses the updated activity distributions to choose a new electrode configuration, favoring electrodes with high estimated activity while retaining uncertainty-driven exploration. 

Algorithm 1. Discounted Poisson–Gamma Thompson sampling for electrode selection 

Input: Candidate electrodes C; channel budget k; window duration ∆

Prior parameters α0, β 0; discount factor ρ; temperature τ

Output: Selected electrode sets St; offline replay attainment scores 1: αc ← α0, βc ← β0 for all c ∈ C 

2: for each recording window t = 1 , . . . , T do 

3: αc ← ρα c, βc ← ρβ c for all c ∈ C 

4: Sample ˜λc ∼ Gamma( αc/τ, β c/τ ) for all c ∈ C 

5: St ← TopK( {˜λc}c∈C , k )

6: Record spike counts yc,t for all c ∈ St

7: αc ← αc + yc,t , βc ← βc + ∆ for all c ∈ St

8: if offline reference data are available then 

9: Rt ← P 

> c∈St

yc,t 

10: S∗ 

> t

← TopK( {yc,t }c∈C , k )

11: R∗ 

> t

← P 

> c∈S∗
> t

yc,t 

12: Attainment t ← 100 Rt/R ∗

> t

13: end if 

14: end for 

By accounting for temporal variability, the method aims to improve recording efficiency relative to static or heuristic strategies and to connect the spatial information available on modern HD-MEAs with the finite readout resources imposed by current hardware. 

# 2 Method 

4Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

Table 1. Parameters used for offline replay and the representative online recording. The offline replay used koff = 100 

selected electrodes from 529 candidates. The online recording used the hardware channel budget of kon = 1024 routed electrodes from the full 26,400-electrode array; the same Bayesian update interval and hyperparameters were used.                                               

> Parameter Symbol Value Used in Candidate electrodes, offline replay |C off |529 Offline replay Selected electrodes, offline replay koff 100 Offline replay Candidate electrodes, online recording |C on |26,400 Online recording Selected electrodes, online recording kon 1,024 Online recording Bin width / update interval ∆1800 s (30 min) Offline replay and online recording Seed runs Nseed 50 Offline randomized methods Exploration rate ε0.2 Offline ε-greedy Decay factor d1.0 Offline ε-greedy Initial exploration bins –1Offline ε-greedy Prior shape α05.0 Proposed method, offline and online Prior rate β01.0 s Proposed method, offline and online Discount factor ρ0.7 Proposed method, offline and online Temperature τ1.0 Proposed method, offline and online

2.1 Culture preparation 

All animal procedures conformed to the Guiding Principles for the Care and Use of Animals in the Field of Physio-logical Science published by the Japanese Physiological Society. The experimental protocol was approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments at the Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, the University of Tokyo (A2024IST003). HD-MEA chips were first cleaned with 1 mL of 1% Tergazyme (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 2 h at room temperature. After removing the detergent, the chips were rinsed three times with sterilized water, im-mersed in ethanol for 30 min, and rinsed three additional times. The electrode area was then covered with 1 mL of pre-warmed plating medium (Neurobasal Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), protected from drying, and kept in an incubator for at least 2 days before coating. Before cell seeding, the chips were rinsed three times with sterilized water. Polyethylenimine (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA) was diluted to 0.07% in borate buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 50 μL of the solution was applied to the electrode area. The chips were incubated overnight, washed three times, and coated with 5 μL of laminin (20 

μg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h. Pregnant Wistar rats were anesthetized with inhaled isoflu-rane (Viatris, Canonsburg, PA, USA) and euthanized by decapitation. After abdominal disinfection with ethanol, the uterus was removed and transferred to Hank’s Bal-anced Salt Solution (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Three embryonic day 18 fetuses were collected, and cortical tissue was dissected from the isolated brains. The cortical tissue was incubated in 2 mL of 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 20 min, with gentle agitation every 5 min. The enzymatic reaction was stopped by transferring the tissue to plating medium. The tissue was then moved to fresh medium and mechanically dissociated by trituration. The cell suspension was passed through a 40 μm cell strainer (Falcon, Corning, NY, USA), and plating medium was added to adjust the cell density to 38,000 cells per 5 μL. After removing the laminin solution, 5 μL of the cell sus-pension was placed onto the electrode area of each chip. The chips were incubated for 120 min to allow cell attach-ment, after which 0.6 mL of plating medium was added. Cultures were maintained at 36.5 ◦C in 5% CO 2. To reduce evaporation, each chip was covered with its lid and placed in a 90 mm dish together with a 35 mm dish containing sterilized water. The culture-preparation workflow is summarized in fig-ure 1(A), and a representative DIV15 culture prepared on an HD-MEA is shown in figure 1(B). 

2.2 Electrical long-term recording 

Spontaneous extracellular activity was recorded using a CMOS-based HD-MEA platform (MaxOne, MaxWell Biosystems, Zurich, Switzerland). The array contains 26,400 electrodes over a 3.85 × 2.10 mm 2 recording area. The electrode pitch is 17.5 μm, and each electrode is 11.5 

× 11.5 μm2. The full-array activity map and local dense-recording region are shown in figure 1(C). Each densely routed reference recording used for offline replay lasted 34 h and provided dense activity measurements from a local electrode region. This duration was chosen because, under the approximately 1 mL medium volume used on the chip during recording, stable long-term measurements were reli-ably maintained up to about 34 h. Raw extracellular traces were band-pass filtered between 300 and 3000 Hz before spike detection, and detected spikes were converted to spike counts for each recording window. Recording meta-data and additional candidate-region maps are provided in supplementary table ?? and supplementary figure ?? .Network bursts were detected from the cumulative spike train using the ISI N framework described by Bakkum et al 

[ 39 ]. We used the same setting throughout all burst analy-ses: N = 100 . Thus, intervals in which 100 consecutive 5Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

population spikes occurred within 100 ms were treated as burst candidates for subsequent raster and centroid analy-ses. Additional spike-event and burst-detection details are provided in supplementary note ?? .The densely routed recordings were used as reference data for the offline evaluation of electrode-selection algorithms described below. Activity maps from recording onset, 10 h, 20 h, and 34 h after recording onset are shown in fig-ure 1(D), illustrating the temporal redistribution of highly active electrodes during the recording. 

2.3 Dynamic electrode-selection algorithm 

An overview of the proposed dynamic electrode-selection procedure is shown in figure 2. In brief, the algorithm records activity from the currently configured electrodes, updates a probabilistic model of electrode activity from the observed spike counts, and uses the updated uncertainty to choose the next electrode configuration. The physical electrode-selection problem on the HD-MEA is to choose up to 1024 routed electrodes from the full 26,400-electrode array, as illustrated in figure 1(E). Direct evaluation of an adaptive policy in this setting is difficult because the activity on unselected electrodes is not ob-served and the oracle selection cannot be computed. We therefore evaluated the algorithms in a downscaled offline setting. A dense 23 × 23 region, corresponding to 529 electrodes, was routed over an active area and recorded continuously for 34 h. These 529 electrodes were treated as the candidate set, and each algorithm selected 100 elec-trodes at each decision step, corresponding to the offline evaluation setting in figure 1(F). This setting preserves the central constraint of the original problem: only a subset of electrodes can be observed at each time, but the densely recorded reference data allow the oracle to be computed retrospectively. Detailed replay and baseline definitions are provided in supplementary note ?? .Let C denote the candidate electrode set and let time be divided into recording windows indexed by t = 1 , . . . , T .The duration of each window is denoted by ∆, and the spike count of electrode c ∈ C in window t is denoted by 

yc,t . At each step, the algorithm chooses k electrodes to record, 

St ⊂ C , |St| = k, (1) where St is the selected electrode set and k = 100 in the offline evaluation. Only the spike counts from these se-lected electrodes are made available to the algorithm. The captured activity in each window was defined as the total spike count on the selected electrodes, 

Rt = X

> c∈St

yc,t . (2) For reporting in firing-rate units, we used FR t = Rt/∆.Here, TopK( {vc}c∈C , k ) denotes the k electrodes with the largest values vc.For each recording window, we also computed an oracle subset from the full offline recording. This oracle simply selected the k electrodes with the largest spike counts in that same window, 

S∗ 

> t

= TopK ( {yc,t }c∈C , k ) , (3) and the corresponding oracle activity was R∗ 

> t

=P

> c∈S∗
> t

yc,t . We evaluated each method by the percent-age of this oracle activity that it captured, 

Attainment t = 100 × Rt

R∗

> t

. (4) Because firing rate is obtained by dividing spike count by the same window duration ∆, the same percentage is obtained from firing rates. To quantify non-stationarity of the activity maps, we com-puted the turnover of the most active electrodes in the densely recorded reference data. Let 

At = TopK ( {yc,t }c∈C , k ) (5) denote the top-k active electrodes in window t. The turnover relative to the initial active set was defined as 

Turnover t = 100 ×



1 − |A1 ∩ At|

k



. (6) This measure is 0% when the same top-k electrodes are retained and increases as initially active electrodes are replaced by newly active electrodes. Algorithm 1 summarizes the full proposed procedure. The attainment calculation is included only for offline evalua-tion, where the reference activity of all candidate electrodes is available. We used captured spike count as the primary reward be-cause it is directly observable from routed channels, inde-pendent of hardware-specific spike-sorting assumptions, and provides a simple proxy for preserving downstream spatial summaries such as center-of-activity trajectories. This choice also makes the offline oracle well defined: the best subset in each window is the subset that captures the largest number of spikes under the same channel budget. We modeled the spike count of each electrode using a Poisson–Gamma model. For readability, the time subscript is omitted from the model parameters below; the parame-ters are updated after every recording window. The current firing rate of electrode c is denoted by λc, and the expected spike count in one window is λc∆:

yc,t ∼ Poisson( λc∆) . (7) The algorithm represents uncertainty about λc with a Gamma distribution, 

λc ∼ Gamma( αc, β c), (8) using the shape–rate parameterization. In the shape–rate parameterization, the current expected firing rate is 

mean( λc) = αc

βc

. (9) The Gamma distribution was used because it can be up-dated directly from Poisson spike counts. All electrodes 6Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

were initialized with the same prior parameters listed in table 1. To account for non-stationarity in the activity distribu-tion, old observations were discounted before each update [36 , 37 ]. At the beginning of each window, the sufficient statistics were scaled as 

αc ← ρα c, βc ← ρβ c (c ∈ C ), (10) where 0 < ρ ≤ 1 is the discount factor. This keeps the current mean αc/β c unchanged, but increases uncertainty when ρ < 1, allowing the algorithm to revisit electrodes whose activity may have changed. After observing the se-lected electrodes in window t, only those electrodes were updated: 

αc ← αc + yc,t , βc ← βc + ∆ c ∈ St. (11) Electrodes not selected in the current window were not assigned artificial observations; only the discounting step was applied to them. Electrodes were selected by Thompson sampling [ 38 ]. In each window, one plausible firing rate was sampled for ev-ery electrode from its current Gamma distribution. To tune the degree of exploration, we used a temperature parameter 

τ > 0:

˜λc ∼ Gamma 

 αc

τ , βc

τ



. (12) The algorithm then selected the k electrodes with the largest sampled rates, 

St = TopK 



{˜λc}c∈C , k 



. (13) This rule usually selects electrodes with high estimated firing rates, while still giving uncertain electrodes a chance to be sampled. The temperature scaling preserves the mean 

αc/β c; larger τ increases exploration, whereas smaller τ

makes the policy more exploitative. We compared the proposed method with static selection, random selection, and a combinatorial ε-greedy baseline. Static selection chose the 100 electrodes with the largest spike counts in the first 30 min window of the dense 529-electrode reference recording and kept this subset fixed throughout the offline replay. Random selection chose 100 electrodes uniformly at random in each window. The combinatorial ε-greedy baseline maintained an online mean estimate ˆμc for each electrode. At window t, the number of randomly sampled electrodes, krand (t), was set to the nearest integer to εtk. The baseline selected these electrodes at random and filled the remaining k − krand (t)

positions with the electrodes that had the largest current mean estimates. During the initial exploration period, all selected electrodes were sampled randomly. For each se-lected electrode, the online mean was updated as 

ˆμc ← ˆμc + 1

nc

(yc,t − ˆμc) , (14) where nc is the number of times electrode c has been se-lected, including the current observation. The exploration rate was exponentially decayed as εt+1 = εtd. In the main comparison, d = 1 .0, so the ε-greedy exploration rate was held constant; decayed variants are evaluated in supplementary figure ?? (D,E). The parameter values used for the offline evaluation and representative online recording are summarized in table 1. Because random selection, combinatorial ε-greedy se-lection, and Thompson sampling depend on stochastic choices, each stochastic method was run 50 times with different random seeds for each recording. For dataset 

i and seed run r, a distinct random seed was used. The 50 seed runs were first averaged within each recording. Time-resolved traces and turnover values were then sum-marized across the nine recordings as the mean with a two-sided 95% confidence interval, calculated at each time point as ¯x ± t0.975 ,n −1s/ √n with n = 9 recordings; lower confidence limits were clipped at zero. Final attainment values for the proposed method and static selection were compared across recordings using a two-sided exact paired sign-flip randomization test. For each recording, after aver-aging over seed runs, we subtracted the final attainment of static selection from the final attainment of the proposed method. The test statistic was the absolute value of the mean of these paired differences, and the exact null distri-bution was obtained by enumerating all 29 possible sign flips. 

# 3 Results 

3.1 Spontaneous activity maps were non-stationary over long-term recording 

Before evaluating electrode-selection policies, we first quantified whether the active electrode set remained stable during the 34 h recordings. Using the densely recorded 529-electrode reference data, we identified the top-100 ac-tive electrodes in each 30 min window and measured their turnover relative to the initial top-100 set (figure 3(A)). The active set changed substantially over time. Turnover increased during the recording and reached 47.8% at 34 h, with a 95% confidence interval of 34.4–61.2% across nine recordings (figure 3(B)). Thus, by the end of the record-ing, roughly half of the electrodes that best represented the current activity were not part of the initially most ac-tive subset. This directly supports the central motivation for adaptive selection: a scan-and-commit strategy based on an initial activity map can lose access to informative electrodes as spontaneous activity redistributes over long-term recording. Per-recording turnover traces, firing-rate map correlations, and activity-centroid drift are shown in supplementary figure ?? .7Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT top-100     

> 0
> 50
> 100
> Turnover (%)
> mean 47.8%
> 95% CI 34.4-61.2%
> n = 9
> Final turnover (34.0 h)
> Static Proposed
> 0
> 50
> 100
> Attainment (%)
> p = 0.004
> diff +17.2 pp; n = 9
> Final attainment (34.0 h)
> A
> C
> B
> D
> Static Random Epsilon-greedy Proposed method

Figure 3: Non-stationarity of active electrodes and offline evaluation of adaptive electrode selection. (A) Turnover of the top-100 active electrodes over the 34 h recording, computed relative to the top-100 electrodes in the initial 30 min window. (B) Final top-100 turnover at 34 h across nine recordings. (C) Oracle-relative attainment for static selection, random selection, combinatorial ε-greedy selection, and the proposed method. Attainment is the percentage of oracle spike-count activity captured by the selected electrodes in each time window. (D) Final attainment at 34 h for static selection and the proposed method across nine recordings. Curves show the across-recording mean for each 30 min bin; stochastic policies were averaged over 50 random seeds within each recording before this across-recording summary. Shaded regions indicate across-recording 95% confidence intervals where applicable; circles indicate individual recordings. The final comparison in (D) was performed across recordings using a two-sided exact paired sign-flip randomization test. 

3.2 Adaptive selection improved long-term activity capture 

We next asked whether adaptive electrode selection could recover more spontaneous activity than fixed or heuristic channel assignment under the same recording budget (fig-ure 3(C,D)). In the downscaled offline replay, each method selected 100 electrodes from 529 candidate electrodes at every recording step. Performance was measured by the attainment score, which compares the activity captured by the selected electrodes with the activity captured by the oracle subset for the same time window. After an initial exploratory phase, the Bayesian adaptive method captured more activity than the baseline strategies and maintained higher oracle-relative attainment during the later recording period (figure 3(C)). In oracle-relative terms, it achieved the highest attainment among the tested strategies and consistently outperformed static selection, random selection, and combinatorial ε-greedy selection. The improvement over static selection is consistent with the non-stationary structure of the recordings: electrodes that were active early in the recording did not necessarily remain the most informative throughout the full 34-hour period. 8Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 0 20 40 60                 

> Time (s)
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> Channel
> AStart (0 h)
> 1700 1725 1750 1775 1800
> Time (s)
> First burst (16.5 h)
> Detected burst
> 020 40 60 80
> Time (s)
> Burst raster (48 h)
> 0
> 800
> 1600
> y (um)
> BFirst burst (16.5 h) 24 h
> 0
> 800
> 1600
> y (um)
> 30 h 40 h
> 01500 3000
> x (um)
> 0
> 800
> 1600
> y (um)
> 48 h
> 01500 3000
> x (um)
> 60 h
> early
> late
> Order

Figure 4: Representative online adaptive recording during network-burst emergence. Recording began 30 h after cell seeding, and the routed electrode set was updated every 30 min. The online recording used 1,024 routed electrodes; Bayesian hyperparameters other than the channel budget were taken from the best-performing offline setting in table 1. Times indicate elapsed time from recording onset. (A) Raster plots show selected-electrode activity at onset, around the first detected network burst, and during later recurrent synchronized bursts. Activity was initially sparse, then appeared as localized events before developing into synchronized population bursts; shaded regions mark detected burst intervals. 

(B) Activity maps and trajectories show spike-count-weighted activity centroids within burst intervals. Spike events were assigned electrode coordinates, binned at 5 ms, and bins with fewer than 10 spikes were omitted; trajectories were smoothed with polynomial fits of degree at most three. Later trajectories became more recurrent, consistent with progressive organization of coordinated spatial activity. 9Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

At the final 34 h time point, the proposed method exceeded static selection by 17.2 percentage points in attainment across the nine recordings (two-sided exact paired sign-flip randomization test, p = 0 .004 ; figure 3(D)). The method consistently exceeded the baseline strategies, suggesting that the benefit was not limited to a single recording or activity pattern. This robustness is important for long-term HD-MEA experiments, where the spatial distribution of spontaneous activity can change gradually or abruptly. Per-recording replay traces are shown in supplementary figure ?? , and ablation and parameter-sensitivity analyses are shown in supplementary figures ?? and ?? .Random selection provided a reference for unguided sam-pling, while static selection represented the common scan-and-commit strategy. Combinatorial ε-greedy selection im-proved on purely static assignment by allowing occasional exploration, but it did not match the Bayesian method. Thompson sampling increased exploration when posterior uncertainty was large and reduced it when the evidence for high activity was more stable, allowing the selected elec-trode set to follow changes without abandoning high-yield electrodes unnecessarily. 

3.3 Representative online recording of the first network burst 

We next tested whether the proposed adaptive policy could be executed online during an ongoing HD-MEA record-ing (figure 4). Recording began 30 h after cell seeding, and the routed electrode configuration was updated ev-ery 30 min using the Bayesian hyperparameters that per-formed best in the offline replay; the online channel budget was 1,024 electrodes (table 1). At recording onset, the selected electrodes showed no clear network-level activity. Activity then emerged gradually: sporadic and spatially restricted events appeared first, followed by broader popu-lation events and synchronized network bursts. This progression is consistent with previous MEA studies in which Chiappalone et al. [5] reported spontaneously correlated activity during in vitro development and Wage-naar et al. [6] described rich bursting patterns in cortical cultures. We therefore focused on the first synchronized burst after recording onset because it marks the transition from sparse local activity to coordinated network activ-ity. In this online recording, the first burst was visible as a population-level increase in the electrodes selected by the proposed method, illustrating that the policy could be deployed in real time and preserve an early network-wide event. 

3.4 Activity centroids summarized burst trajectories 

To summarize the spatial structure of the online recording, we computed activity-centroid trajectories for the detected burst intervals in figure 4. This analysis follows the idea of the center of activity trajectory, which has been used to reduce MEA spatiotemporal activity patterns to location-weighted trajectories [ 29 ]. Spike event frame numbers were converted to time in milliseconds using the 20 kHz sampling rate, and each event was assigned the physical position of its electrode channel from the recording meta-data. Each burst interval was then divided into 5 ms bins; bins containing fewer than 10 spikes were excluded from the trajectory calculation. For each retained bin b, the activity centroid was computed as the mean position of all spikes in that bin, 

xact (b) = 1

|Bb|

X

> j∈Bb

xcj , (15) where Bb is the set of spikes in bin b, cj is the electrode channel of spike j, and xcj is the two-dimensional elec-trode position. Because the average is taken over spikes rather than unique electrodes, repeated spikes on the same electrode contribute repeatedly. The centroid is therefore equivalent to a spike-count-weighted center of activity, with xact and yact given by the mean of the spike positions along the two array axes. For each burst, the time-ordered centroid sequence formed a spatial trajectory. For visualization, trajectories were smoothed with a polynomial fit of degree at most three. The centroid trajectory complemented the firing-rate anal-ysis: firing-rate traces indicate how much activity was cap-tured, whereas the activity centroid indicates where that activity was expressed on the array. In the representative recording, centroid trajectories were sparse and variable around the first burst, but gradually became more recurrent and followed similar paths in later windows after burst emergence (figure 4). In this representative recording, this representation reduced each burst to a spatial trajectory that could be followed over many hours. Optional supplemen-tary movies 1–3 provide time-lapse visualizations of the selected-electrode map and representative activity-centroid trajectories (supplementary table ?? ). 

# 4 Discussion 

4.1 Adaptive sensing of non-stationary activity 

This study treated HD-MEA electrode allocation as an adaptive sensing problem for long-term recordings of spon-taneous activity. The offline replay provides the main quan-titative validation, whereas the online recording demon-strates feasibility of adaptive routing in a representative preparation. In offline replay of densely routed recordings, the results show that a Bayesian selection strategy can cap-ture a large fraction of the activity available to an oracle while using only a limited number of recording channels. The main advantage is that the method does not assume a fixed set of informative electrodes; the configuration is updated as new observations arrive. 10 Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

This distinction is important for dissociated neuronal cul-tures because spontaneous activity is structured but not stationary. Bursts may recur, but their spatial expres-sion can vary across time, and gradual changes in culture state can shift the electrodes that provide the most useful signals. This interpretation is consistent with long-term HD-MEA observations that mature dissociated cultures can show chronic co-variation between network configu-ration and activity, suggesting that electrode usefulness may change with slow network reorganization rather than only with short-term firing-rate fluctuations [ 26 ]. A scan-and-commit strategy can work well when activity remains stable, but it has no mechanism for recovery once the in-formative region moves away from the initially selected electrodes. By maintaining uncertainty over electrode ac-tivity and discounting older observations, the proposed method can continue to test alternatives while preserving high-yield sites. The comparison with combinatorial ε-greedy selection also suggests that exploration alone is not sufficient. Random exploration can discover changes, but it does not use un-certainty in a targeted way. Thompson sampling links exploration to the posterior distribution: electrodes are more likely to be sampled when they are either estimated to be active or remain uncertain enough to be plausibly use-ful. This property is well matched to long-term HD-MEA recordings, where the cost of each channel assignment is high and the activity landscape changes over time. A recent-rate ranking strategy would be a strong baseline if recent spike counts were available for all electrodes. In the actual HD-MEA setting, however, activity on unselected electrodes is not observed. Obtaining an updated full-array firing-rate map would require a new scan of the array; in our setup, covering the 26,400-electrode array required 26 configurations of 1,024 electrodes recorded for 60 s each, corresponding to approximately 26 min per scan. Thus, frequent rescanning would consume a substantial fraction of the recording time and could miss transient population events during non-targeted scan configurations. We therefore focused on policies that update electrode al-location from partial observations under the same fixed channel budget, rather than assuming free access to recent full-array activity. 

4.2 Spike count as an initial selection objective 

The activity-centroid analysis provides another way to in-terpret why maximizing captured events is useful. Let x

denote the position of a spike event, and let m be the cen-troid computed from all events in a time window. If the selected electrodes capture a fraction ps of events, with centroid ms, and the missed events have centroid mc, then the full centroid can be written as 

m = psms + (1 − ps)mc. (16) Therefore, the error of the centroid estimated from selected electrodes alone satisfies 

∥ms − m∥ = 1 − ps

ps

∥m − mc∥. (17) This relation shows that, for bounded spatial activity, in-creasing the fraction of captured events directly reduces the possible centroid bias. Thus, a selection objective based on captured spike count is not only a measure of recording yield; it is also aligned with preserving center-of-activity trajectories under a limited channel budget. We used spike count as the first objective because it is directly observable, hardware-independent, and does not require assumptions about unit sorting or downstream event la-bels. The argument does not remove the need for spatially aware objectives in future work, but it explains why high event capture is a reasonable initial objective for long-term centroid-based analysis. At the same time, spike-count maximization can over-sample highly active regions and under-sample lower-rate sites that are spatially or temporally informative. Depend-ing on the experiment, future selection objectives could combine spike count with spatial diversity, sensitivity to burst onset, mutual information, propagation reconstruc-tion error, uncertainty reduction, or novelty and change-point detection. A post hoc spatially regularized analysis is provided in supplementary figure ?? . These alternatives would allow the same adaptive framework to target burst detection, propagation tracking, unit isolation quality, or information gain rather than recording yield alone. 

4.3 Limitations and future directions 

Several limitations should be noted. First, the main quan-titative evaluation used densely routed recordings to sim-ulate a reduced channel budget offline. This was nec-essary for oracle-based comparison. The representative online run demonstrated online adaptive updates in one recording; however, systematic full-array online evaluation across multiple recordings remains future work. Scaling online implementation will require accounting for hard-ware switching latency, routing constraints, and the timing at which spike counts become available. Second, the cur-rent model treats electrodes independently. Incorporating spatial correlations could improve performance when ac-tivity propagates across neighboring electrodes or when neighboring electrodes provide redundant information. Although this study focused on in vitro HD-MEAs, the same adaptive-sensing formulation may also be relevant to high-density in vivo probes, including Neuropixels-style devices, where dense recording sites can exceed the num-ber of simultaneously usable channels and channel selec-tion may need to adapt to unit yield, signal quality, or behavioral relevance [ 30 , 40 ]. In that setting, the reward would not need to be the total spike count; it could be defined from unit isolation quality, spike-sorting stability, task information, or information gain. Such extensions would require validation under in vivo constraints such as probe drift, tissue motion, and changing behavioral state, but they follow the same principle of choosing the next measurement from partial observations under a fixed chan-nel budget. 11 Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

Even with these limitations, the proposed framework pro-vides a practical route toward adaptive HD-MEA recording. Rather than using dense electrode arrays only for an initial scan, the array can be treated as a resource that is revisited throughout the experiment. This view is useful for long-term culture recordings, where the target is not a static map of active sites but the evolving dynamics of the network. 

# 5 Conclusion 

We developed a Bayesian adaptive electrode-selection framework for long-term spontaneous HD-MEA record-ings from dissociated neuronal cultures. By formulating electrode allocation as a sequential subset-selection prob-lem, the method updates electrode activity estimates from observed spike counts and reallocates the fixed channel budget over time. This formulation directly addresses a practical limitation of HD-MEA experiments: the array provides dense spatial coverage, but only a subset of elec-trodes can be routed for simultaneous recording. Using densely routed recordings as offline reference data, we first confirmed that the active electrode set was not stable: across nine recordings, top-100 active-electrode turnover reached 47.8% at 34 h. The proposed method then captured a larger fraction of oracle activity than static, ran-dom, and combinatorial ε-greedy strategies, and exceeded static selection by 17.2 percentage points at the final 34 h time point. These results indicate that uncertainty-aware exploration and temporal discounting are useful for fol-lowing non-stationary activity patterns over many hours in replayed recordings. Representative online analysis further illustrated that adap-tive selection could preserve biologically relevant tran-sient events, including the first synchronized burst in one recording, and could provide activity maps suitable for downstream spatial summaries such as center-of-activity trajectories. Thus, the benefit of adaptive selection is not limited to increasing total spike yield; it may also help preserve temporal and spatial readouts that are important for interpreting long-term changes in cultured neuronal networks. Taken together, these findings suggest that spontaneous activity in dissociated neuronal networks should not be treated as a static spatial target. Informative electrodes changed over hours, and adaptive allocation allowed the recorded subset to follow this evolving activity more effec-tively than scan-and-commit strategies. Thus, the present study provides a proof of concept for adaptive sensing of evolving neural activity under hardware readout con-straints. Future work should extend the framework to systematic full-array real-time evaluation across multiple recordings, incorporate spatial correlations between neigh-boring electrodes, and define selection objectives tailored to specific experimental goals such as burst initiation, prop-agation analysis, or information-maximizing recording. 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (24K20854, 25H02600, 26H02517), AMED (24wm0625401h0001), the Asahi Glass Foundation, and the Secom Science and Technology Foundation. 

# Author Contributions 

Conceptualization: KT, DA, HT. Methodology: KT, DA. Software: KT. Validation: KT, DA. Formal analysis: KT, DA. Investigation: KT, DA. Resources: DA, HT. Data Curation: KT, DA, HT. Writing - Original Draft: KT. Writing - Review & Editing: DA, HT. Visualization: KT, DA. Supervision: DA, HT. Project administration: HT. Funding acquisition: KT, DA, HT. 

# Data Availability 

Core analysis code implementing the proposed Bayesian electrode selection framework is available at https:// github.com/nelab-utokyo/dynamic_sampling . The repository will be updated with the final analysis scripts upon publication of the peer-reviewed article. Code interfacing with proprietary hardware APIs (MaxOne, Maxwell Biosystems) is available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The data that support the findings of this study will be made openly available upon publication of the peer-reviewed article. 

# Conflict of Interest Statement 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 12 Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

# ORCID iDs 

Kazushi Takehana  https://orcid.org/0009-0000-8487-3826 

Dai Akita  https://orcid.org/0009-0009-6445-2587 

Hirokazu Takahashi  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1834-3832 

# Supplementary Material 

Supplementary material is included with this arXiv version as a separate file. File title: Supplementary material. File description: Recording metadata, candidate-region maps, spike and burst detection details, offline replay definitions, non-stationarity analyses, per-recording replay results, ablation analyses, hyperparameter sensitivity, spatially regularized objective analyses, and optional supplementary movie descriptions for adaptive HD-MEA electrode selection. 

# References 

[1] C. A. Thomas, P. A. Springer, G. E. Loeb, Y. Berwald-Netter, and L. M. Okun. A miniature microelectrode array to monitor the bioelectric activity of cultured cells. Experimental Cell Research , 74(1):61–66, 1972. doi:10.1016/0014-4827(72)90481-8. [2] Yasuhiko Jimbo and Akio Kawana. Electrical stimulation and recording from cultured neurons using a planar electrode array. Bioelectrochemistry and Bioenergetics , 29(2):193–204, 1992. doi:10.1016/0302-4598(92)80067-Q. [3] Marie Engelene J Obien, Kosmas Deligkaris, Torsten Bullmann, Douglas J Bakkum, and Urs Frey. Re-vealing neuronal function through microelectrode array recordings. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 8:423, 2015. doi:10.3389/fnins.2014.00423. [4] Jaap Van Pelt, Pieter S Wolters, Michael A Corner, Wim LC Rutten, and Ger JA Ramakers. Long-term characteri-zation of firing dynamics of spontaneous bursts in cultured neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , 51(11):2051–2062, 2004. doi:10.1109/TBME.2004.827936. [5] Michela Chiappalone, Marco Bove, Alessandro Vato, Mariateresa Tedesco, and Sergio Martinoia. Dissociated cortical networks show spontaneously correlated activity patterns during in vitro development. Brain research ,1093(1):41–53, 2006. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2006.03.049. [6] Daniel A Wagenaar, Jerome Pine, and Steve M Potter. An extremely rich repertoire of bursting patterns during the development of cortical cultures. BMC neuroscience , 7(1):11, 2006. doi:10.1186/1471-2202-7-11. [7] Christian Tetzlaff, Samora Okujeni, Ulrich Egert, Florentin Wörgötter, and Markus Butz. Self-organized criticality in developing neuronal networks. PLoS computational biology , 6(12):e1001013, 2010. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001013. [8] David Cabrera-Garcia, Davide Warm, Pablo de la Fuente, M Teresa Fernández-Sánchez, Antonello Novelli, and Joaquín M Villanueva-Balsera. Early prediction of developing spontaneous activity in cultured neuronal networks. 

Scientific reports , 11(1):20407, 2021. doi:10.1038/s41598-021-99538-9. [9] Yuichiro Yada, Takeshi Mita, Akihiro Sanada, Ryuichi Yano, Ryohei Kanzaki, Douglas J Bakkum, Andreas Hierlemann, and Hirokazu Takahashi. Development of neural population activity toward self-organized criticality. 

Neuroscience , 343:55–65, 2017. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.11.031. [10] Daniel A Wagenaar, Zoltan Nadasdy, and Steve M Potter. Persistent dynamic attractors in activity patterns of cultured neuronal networks. Physical Review E , 73(5):051907, 2006. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.73.051907. [11] Timothée Masquelier and Gustavo Deco. Network bursting dynamics in excitatory cortical neuron cul-tures results from the combination of different adaptive mechanisms. PLOS ONE , 8(10):e75824, 2013. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0075824. [12] Amit Yaron, Zhuo Zhang, Dai Akita, Tomoyo Isoguchi Shiramatsu, Zenas C Chao, and Hirokazu Takahashi. Dissociated neuronal cultures as model systems for self-organized prediction. Frontiers in Neural Circuits , 19: 1568652, 2025. doi:10.3389/fncir.2025.1568652. [13] Zhuo Zhang, Amit Yaron, Dai Akita, Tomoyo Isoguchi Shiramatsu, Zenas C Chao, and Hirokazu Takahashi. Deviance detection and regularity sensitivity in dissociated neuronal cultures. Frontiers in Neural Circuits , 19: 1584322, 2025. doi:10.3389/fncir.2025.1584322. 13 Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

[14] Narumitsu Ikeda, Dai Akita, and Hirokazu Takahashi. Emergent functions of noise-driven spontaneous activity: homeostatic maintenance of criticality and memory consolidation. Frontiers in Neural Circuits , 19:1585087, 2025. doi:10.3389/fncir.2025.1585087. [15] Urs Frey, Jan Sedivy, Flavio Heer, Rene Pedron, Marco Ballini, Jan Mueller, Douglas Bakkum, Sadik Hafizovic, Francesca D Faraci, Frauke Greve, et al. Switch-matrix-based high-density microelectrode array in cmos technology. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , 45(2):467–482, 2010. doi:10.1109/JSSC.2009.2035196. [16] Douglas J Bakkum, Urs Frey, Milos Radivojevic, Thomas L Russell, Jan Müller, Michele Fiscella, Hirokazu Taka-hashi, and Andreas Hierlemann. Tracking axonal action potential propagation on a high-density microelectrode array across hundreds of sites. Nature Communications , 4:2181, 2013. doi:10.1038/ncomms3181. [17] Marco Ballini, Jan Müller, Paolo Livi, Yihui Chen, Urs Frey, Alexander Stettler, Amir Shadmani, Vijay Viswam, Ian Lloyd Jones, David Jäckel, et al. A 1024-channel cmos microelectrode array with 26,400 electrodes for recording and stimulation of electrogenic cells in vitro. IEEE journal of solid-state circuits , 49(11):2705–2719, 2014. doi:10.1109/JSSC.2014.2359219. [18] Jan Müller, Marco Ballini, Paolo Livi, Yihui Chen, Milos Radivojevic, Amir Shadmani, Vijay Viswam, Ian L Jones, Michele Fiscella, Roland Diggelmann, et al. High-resolution cmos mea platform to study neurons at subcellular, cellular, and network levels. Lab on a Chip , 15(13):2767–2780, 2015. doi:10.1039/C5LC00133A. [19] Marie Engelene J. Obien and Urs Frey. Large-scale, high-resolution microelectrode arrays for interrogation of neurons and networks. In Michela Chiappalone, Valentina Pasquale, and Monica Frega, editors, In Vitro Neuronal Networks , volume 22 of Advances in Neurobiology , pages 83–123. Springer, Cham, 2019. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-11135-9_4. [20] Yuichiro Yada, Ryohei Kanzaki, and Hirokazu Takahashi. State-dependent propagation of neuronal sub-population in spontaneous synchronized bursts. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience , 10:28, 2016. doi:10.3389/fnsys.2016.00028. [21] Satohiro Tajima, Takeshi Mita, Douglas J Bakkum, Hirokazu Takahashi, and Taro Toyoizumi. Locally embedded presages of global network bursts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114(36):9517–9522, 2017. doi:10.1073/pnas.1705981114. [22] Norberto Pérez-Prieto and Manuel Delgado-Restituto. Recording strategies for high channel count, densely spaced microelectrode arrays. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 15:681085, 2021. doi:10.3389/fnins.2021.681085. [23] Luca Berdondini, Kilian Imfeld, Alessandro Maccione, Mariateresa Tedesco, Simon Neukom, Milena Koudelka-Hep, and Sergio Martinoia. Active pixel sensor array for high spatio-temporal resolution electrophysiolog-ical recordings from single cell to large scale neuronal networks. Lab on a Chip , 9(18):2644–2651, 2009. doi:10.1039/B907394A. [24] David Tsai, Daniel Sawyer, Adrian Bradd, Rafael Yuste, and Kenneth L. Shepard. A very large-scale microelectrode array for cellular-resolution electrophysiology. Nature Communications , 8(1):1802, 2017. doi:10.1038/s41467-017-02009-x. [25] Ikuro Suzuki, Naoki Matsuda, Xiaobo Han, Shuhei Noji, Mikako Shibata, Nami Nagafuku, and Yuto Ishibashi. Large-area field potential imaging having single neuron resolution using 236 880 electrodes cmos-mea technology. 

Advanced Science , 10(20):2207732, 2023. doi:10.1002/advs.202207732. [26] Satoru Okawa, Takeshi Mita, Douglas Bakkum, Urs Frey, Andreas Hierlemann, Ryohei Kanzaki, and Hirokazu Takahashi. Chronic co-variation of neural network configuration and activity in mature dissociated cultures. 

Electronics and Communications in Japan , 98(5):34–42, 2015. doi:10.1002/ecj.11736. [27] Rouhollah Habibey, Johannes Striebel, Felix Schmieder, Jürgen Czarske, and Volker Busskamp. Long-term morphological and functional dynamics of human stem cell-derived neuronal networks on high-density micro-electrode arrays. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 16:951964, 2022. doi:10.3389/fnins.2022.951964. [28] John D Rolston, Daniel A Wagenaar, and Steve M Potter. Precisely timed spatiotemporal patterns of neural activity in dissociated cortical cultures. Neuroscience , 148(1):294–303, 2007. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.05.025. [29] Zenas C Chao, Douglas J Bakkum, and Steve M Potter. Region-specific network plasticity in simulated and living cortical networks: comparison of the center of activity trajectory (cat) with other statistics. Journal of Neural Engineering , 4(3):294–308, 2007. doi:10.1088/1741-2560/4/3/015. [30] John Choi, Krishan Kumar, Mohammad Khazali, Katie Wingel, Mahdi Choudhury, Adam S. Charles, and Bijan Pesaran. Optimal adaptive electrode selection to maximize simultaneously recorded neuron yield. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 6160–6171, 2020. 14 Dynamic sampling of spontaneous activity PREPRINT 

[31] Daniel A Wagenaar, Radhika Madhavan, Jerome Pine, and Steve M Potter. Controlling bursting in corti-cal cultures with closed-loop multi-electrode stimulation. Journal of Neuroscience , 25(3):680–688, 2005. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4209-04.2005. [32] Ash Robbins, Hunter E. Schweiger, Sebastian Hernandez, Alex Spaeth, Kateryna Voitiuk, David F. Parks, Tjitse van der Molen, Jinghui Geng, Isabel Cline, Kenneth S. Kosik, Sofie R. Salama, Tal Sharf, Mohammed A. Mostajo-Radji, David Haussler, and Mircea Teodorescu. Goal-directed learning in cortical organoids. Cell Reports , 45(2): 116984, 2026. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2026.116984. [33] Peter Auer, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. 

Machine Learning , 47(2):235–256, 2002. doi:10.1023/A:1013689704352. [34] Olivier Chapelle and Lihong Li. An empirical evaluation of thompson sampling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 24, pages 2249–2257, 2011. [35] Daniel J. Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian Osband, and Zheng Wen. A tutorial on thompson sampling. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 11(1):1–96, 2018. doi:10.1561/2200000070. [36] Aurélien Garivier and Eric Moulines. On upper-confidence bound policies for switching bandit problems. In 

Algorithmic Learning Theory , volume 6925 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 174–188. Springer, 2011. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-24412-4_16. [37] Han Qi, Fei Guo, and Li Zhu. Thompson sampling for non-stationary bandit problems. Entropy , 27(1):51, 2025. doi:10.3390/e27010051. [38] Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit Algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 2020. doi:10.1017/9781108571401. [39] Douglas J Bakkum, Milos Radivojevic, Urs Frey, Felix Franke, Andreas Hierlemann, and Hirokazu Takahashi. Parameters for burst detection. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience , 7:193, 2014. doi:10.3389/fncom.2013.00193. [40] James J. Jun, Nicholas A. Steinmetz, Joshua H. Siegle, Daniel J. Denman, Marius Bauza, Brian Barbarits, Albert K. Lee, Costas A. Anastassiou, Alexandru Andrei, Cagatay Aydin, Mladen Barbic, Timothy J. Blanche, Vincent Bonin, Joao Couto, Barundeb Dutta, Sergey L. Gratiy, Diego A. Gutnisky, Michael Häusser, Bill Karsh, Peter Ledochowitsch, César M. Lopez, Catalin Mitelut, Subhasish Musa, Michael Okun, Marius Pachitariu, Jan Putzeys, P. Dylan Rich, Cyrille Rossant, Wei-lung Sun, Karel Svoboda, Matteo Carandini, Kenneth D. Harris, Christof Koch, John O’Keefe, and Timothy D. Harris. Fully integrated silicon probes for high-density recording of neural activity. Nature , 551(7679):232–236, 2017. doi:10.1038/nature24636. 15